Batch processing began with mainframe computers and punch cards. Today it still plays a central role in business, engineering, science, and other pursuits that require running lots of automated tasks—processing bills and payroll, calculating portfolio risk, designing new products, rendering animated films, testing software, searching for energy, predicting the weather, and finding new cures for disease. Previously only a few had access to the computing power for these scenarios. With Azure Batch, that power is available to you when you need it, without any capital investment.

Choose the operating system and development tools you need to run your large-scale jobs on Batch. Batch provides a consistent job scheduling and management experience whether you select Windows Server or Linux compute nodes, but lets you take advantage of the unique features of each environment. With Windows, use your existing Windows-based code, including .NET, to run large-scale compute jobs in Azure. With Linux, choose from popular distributions including CentOS, Ubuntu, and SUSE Linux Enterprise Server to run your compute jobs, or use Docker containers to lift and shift your applications. Batch provides SDKs and supports a range of development tools including Python and Java.

Batch runs the applications that you use on workstations and clusters today. It’s easy to cloud-enable your executables and scripts to scale out. Batch provides a queue to receive the work that you want to run and executes your applications. Describe the data that need to be moved to the cloud for processing, how the data should be distributed, what parameters to use for each task, and the command to start the process. Think about this like an assembly line with multiple applications. Batch makes it easy to share data between steps and manage the execution as a whole.

You use a workstation today, maybe a small cluster, or you wait in a queue to run your jobs. What if you had access to 16 cores, 100 cores, 10,000 cores, or even 100,000 cores when you needed them, and only had to pay for what you used? With Batch you can. Avoid the bottlenecks and waiting that limit your imagination. What could you do on Azure that you can’t do today?