Teacher Page

Moon Anomalies
Purpose
To investigate and try to explain various lunar
anomalies.

Background [also see “Teacher’s Guide” Pages 4, 10]
In this activity teams of students present hypotheses that attempt to resolve four anomalies of the Moon. They will be expected to prepare written and oral presentations for
the entire class. Using a forum format, students will debate the merits of each
hypothesis, with no right or wrong answers.

The four anomalies are:
“Quakes or No Quakes, that is the Question”
“Where Have All the Volcanoes Gone?”
“Maria, Maria, Where For Art Thou?”
“Magnetic Field Forever?”
Some of these anomalies are more complicated than others. The class need not discuss
all the anomalies; the most straightforward are Quakes and Missing Volcanoes.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheets.
Schedule library time, if needed.

Some possible solutions to the anomalies
Quakes or No Quakes, that is the Question
The number and strength (magnitude) of moonquakes is much less than the number
and magnitude of earthquakes. The probable cause of this difference is the Moon's
smaller size and cooler interior. Earth is hot and active, manifested most dramatically in
plate tectonics. Tectonic plate motions in Earth are driven by convection in the
mantle—the solid mantle actually moves at rates of a few centimeters a year. The
Moon’s mantle, too cool to move easily, has no convection and no active tectonic plate
motions. Fewer movements inside the Moon mean fewer quakes. The few moonquakes that do occur are driven primarily by gravitational tugs by Earth and Sun (tides
in the solid Moon).
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

91

Teacher Page

Moon Anomalies
Where Have All the Volcanoes Gone?
The Moon has lots of lava flows, but no (or at least few) volcanoes. The clue to
solving this dilemma lies in understanding why volcanoes form on Earth, Mars, and
Venus. In fact, those bodies also have large expanses of lava flows that are not associated with volcanoes. For example, vast deposits of lavas occur in Oregon, Washington,
and Idaho. These are called the Columbia River Basalts. They erupted from long
cracks called fissures and flowed across the surface. The path the magma took was
far different from that in other places. The magma never concentrated to narrow conduits that were fed periodically over a long time to form a high mountain over the site.
The transport of magma for the Columbia River basalts was controlled by the stress
environment of the region. Long fissures developed which provided the magma with
pathways to the surface. On the Moon, plenty of fractures occur around the rings of the
multi-ringed basins. These fractures undoubtedly extend far into the Moon, and may
have provided easy access to the surface for magma, and at the same time did not allow
the magma paths to concentrate in one small area. Result: no large volcanoes formed.
The idea that some did form but were destroyed by impacts is always a possibility on the
Moon, but lots of volcano-sized mountains on basin rings survived, so one would expect
volcanoes to do so, too.
Maria, Maria, Where For Art Thou?
Almost all of the lunar maria decorate the Earth-facing side of the Moon. Only a few
add contrast to the farside. See the first two photographs in the “Teacher’s Guide” on
Page 1. The most likely cause of this asymmetry is the variation in thickness of the
Moon’s crust. The crust is lower in density than the mare-basalt magmas that must
pass through it to erupt onto the surface. This, in turn, requires that the magmas have a
sufficient driving pressure to migrate through the crust. Scientists think that magmas on
the Moon tend to stall and collect at the base of the crust. They stay there until the
pressure is enough to begin to form fissures for the magmas to travel through. On the
nearside, the crust is about 70 kilometers thick. Many of the mare-basalt magmas were
able to reach the surface once the pressure was large enough to form cracks. However,
on the farside, the crust is twice as thick, so very few magmas could reach the surface.
Most stalled on their way through it.
Magnetic Field Forever?
The lunar magnetic field is one of the least understood properties about the Moon. It
is about 10,000 times weaker than Earth’s magnetic field. The Moon had a weak field in
the past, but none is being generated at the present time.

92

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Moon Anomalies
The most likely reason for the decline in field strength is that the Moon’s tiny metallic
core (no larger than 400 kilometers in radius) did generate a field the way Earth’s core
does, but the field-generating engine kept losing power. Earth’s field is generated by
convective motions inside the liquid portion of the core: hotter iron rises, cooler iron
sinks, and the differential motions create a magnetic field. On the Moon, the whole
body cooled much faster than Earth (because the Moon is smaller), so the core also
cooled, and probably solidified. Motions fast enough to generate a magnetic field do
not occur today inside the Moon's core.

In Class
Divide the class into cooperative teams of 4-5 students. Encourage each team to generate
a team name and logo. Give each team a “Task Sheet” describing their duties. Each
team then develops a hypothesis that reconciles the dilemma given them. They must
work together to produce a written report describing their anomaly, hypothesis, and
supporting evidence. You may want to copy and distribute all the final reports so each
team has a complete set.
When the teams make their oral presentations to the class they must use visual aid materials, such as maps, posters, charts, slides, laserdiscs, etc. After each presentation, other
teams may challenge the presenters with questions or arguments.

Wrap-up
After all teams have presented, lead a discussion to summarize what has been learned.

Extension
You may wish to discuss another mysterious aspect of the Moon’s magnetic field: the
presence of several small areas (30-60 kilometers across) that have exceptionally large
surface magnetism, about 10 times the normal Moon magnetic field. These are associated
with bright swirly deposits. Possible origins include impact of a comet that is highly
magnetized or magnetization of a comet during impact. In either case, the magnetism is
transferred to the ejecta deposits at the site of impact. Another suggestion is that the
field results from giant, basin-forming impacts. It turns out that most, but not all, magnetic swirl deposits are on the exact opposite side of the Moon from a large basin (i.e.,
antipodal to the site of impact). The idea is that seismic waves generated by the large
impact interact vigorously when they meet half way around the Moon. Somehow these
interactions reinforce existing magnetic fields to create the anomaly. The whitish swirls,
by the way, may form because the solar wind (mostly hydrogen nuclei) is deflected by
the strong magnetic field. Thus, no hydrogen gets implanted into the regolith, and
subsequent micrometeorite bombardment does not cause formation of dark agglutinates. Instead of being dark glass, the agglutinates are colorless or nearly so.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

93

Names:
Date:

Moon Anomalies

Task Sheet
Everyone on your team should be assigned one or more of the following tasks:
Chief Stratigist :

oversees the entire project, works closely with all members,
makes critical decisions.

Material Person : collects, cares for, and returns all materials needed for
the activity.
Media
Consultant :

oversees development of all the visual aid materials that
your team will use during the presentation, such as maps,
posters, models, etc. Also coordinates the use of slides,
photographs, laserdisc, computer, etc.

Administrator :

keeps notes, assists media consultant, and prepares final
written report.

The oral presentation may be made by any one or all team members.

94

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Quakes or No Quakes,
that is the Question

Purpose
To investigate and try to explain why the Moon has
fewer moonquakes than Earth has earthquakes.

Key Words
earthquake
moonquake

Materials
maps of the Moon
background information on
the Moon
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”

Background
The Moon is safer than San Francisco—at least from
earthquake damage. Each year Earth has more than
10,000 earthquakes of magnitude 4 or greater. In
contrast, the Moon has less than 500, and most of
these are smaller than magnitude 2.5. The largest
moonquake recorded during the eight years that the
Apollo seismic instrument operated on the Moon was
slightly less than magnitude 5. On Earth, the largest
quakes reach magnitude 8, or even 9. Finally, the total
amount of energy released by moonquakes is the same
as released by three 100-watt light bulbs. Earthquakes
release the equivalent of 300,000,000 100-watt light
bulbs.

“Task Sheet”
art supplies

Dilemma
Why does the Moon have fewer quakes than Earth?
Is it because people live on Earth? Because the
Moon is smaller? Because Earth has moving tectonic
plates? Because the Moon has craters?

Task
Develop an hypothesis that explains why the Moon
has fewer quakes than Earth.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

95

Where Have All theVolcanoes Gone?

Purpose
To investigate and try to explain the absence of
volcanoes on the Moon.

Key Words

Background

volcano

The dark areas of the Moon’s surface, called the lunar
maria, are composed of solidified lava flows. Scientists know this from photographs that show the
margins of individual lava flows and from examination of rocks returned from the maria. The lava
plains cover 16% of the lunar surface and are up to
about 2 kilometers thick. This is a substantial
amount of lava. Scientists estimate that a total of 10
million cubic kilometers of lava erupted during a
period of about a billion years to fill the mare basins.
This is a lot of lava! -- enough to fill 10 billion football stadiums! Most of the maria occur inside the
huge circular impact craters called multi-ringed basins. The formation of these immense craters did not
cause the formation of the lava that made the maria,
but the basins did provide low areas into which the
liquid lava flowed.

lava flows
maria

Materials
maps of the Moon
background information
on the Moon
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
“Task Sheet”
art supplies

Dilemma
Ten million cubic kilometers of lava flowed across
the Moon’s surface, yet there are no obvious source
volcanoes. There are no mountains that rise dramatically as they do in Hawai'i or the Cascades of the
Pacific Northwest. If there are no volcanoes on the
Moon, then what is the source of the lava? Were the
volcanoes destroyed? Did the lava erupt in some
other way? What other ways could lava erupt?

Task
Develop an hypothesis that resolves the missing
volcanoes dilemma, without rejecting the idea that
the maria are composed of solidified lava flows.

96

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Maria, Maria, Where For Art Thou?

Purpose
To investigate and try to explain why the farside has
fewer maria than the nearside of the Moon.

Key Words
maria

Background

maps of the Moon

About 16% of the Earth-facing side of the Moon is
covered with dark maria. But less than 1% of the
farside is covered with maria. Scientists think that
the magmas were formed inside the Moon by melting of the Moon’s mantle, and that these magmas
then moved to the surface. They probably moved in
long cracks. Good evidence suggests that the crust
on the farside is about two times thicker than on the
nearside.

background information on
the Moon

Dilemma

crust
lava flows

Materials

“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
“Task Sheet”
art supplies

Assuming magma was generated throughout the
Moon’s mantle, why are almost all the maria on the
nearside of the Moon? Did they get covered up by
other rocks on the farside? Did Earth’s gravity help
them get out onto the nearside? Was it too hard to
travel through the thick, farside crust?

Task
Develop an hypothesis that resolves the maria-aremore-abundant-on-the-nearside dilemma.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

97

Magnetic Field Forever?

Purpose
To investigate and try to explain why the Moon has a
weaker magnetic field than does Earth.

Key Words

Background

magnetic field

The Moon has a much weaker magnetic field than
does Earth. However, the field was stronger in the
past, as shown by study of the magnetic properties
of lunar rocks. Earth's magnetic field is formed by
motions inside its iron core. The Moon also has a
core, but it is much smaller than Earth’s core. The
Moon’s core is no larger than 400 kilometers in
radius, and may be as small as 100 kilometers. In
contrast, Earth’s core is 2900 kilometers in radius.

core

Materials
background information
on the Moon
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
“Task Sheet”
art supplies

Dilemma
The Moon had a stronger magnetic field in the past
(billions of years ago), but it is weak now, much
weaker than Earth’s magnetic field. Why is it so
much weaker than Earth’s? Why was it stronger in
the past?

Task
Develop an hypothesis that explains why the Moon
has a weaker magnetic field than does Earth, and
why the Moon’s field was stronger in the past.

98

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Moon ABCs Fact Sheet
Property

Earth

Moon

Brain Busters

Equatorial
diameter

12,756 km

3,476 km

How long would it take to drive
around the Moon's equator at
80 km per hour?

Surface area

510 million
square km

37.8 million
square km

The Moon's surface area is
similar to that of one of Earth's
continents. Which one?

Mass

5.98 x 1024 kg

7.35 x 1022 kg

What percentage of Earth's mass
is the Moon's mass?

Volume

---

---

Can you calculate the volumes of
Earth and the Moon?

Density

5.52 grams per
cubic cm

3.34 grams per
cubic cm

Check this by calculating the
density from the mass and
volume.

Surface
gravity

9.8 m/sec/sec

1.63 m/sec/sec

What fraction of Earth's gravity is
the Moon's gravity?

Crust

Silicate rocks.
Continents
dominated by
granites. Ocean
crust dominated
by basalt.

Silicate rocks.
Highlands
dominated by
feldspar-rich
rocks and maria
by basalt.

What portion of each body is
crust?

Mantle

Silicate rocks
dominated by
minerals
containing iron
and magnesium.

Similar to Earth.

Collect some silicate rocks and
determine the density. Is the
density greater or lesser than the
Earth/Moon's density? Why?

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

17

Moon ABCs Fact Sheet
Property

Earth

Moon

Brain Busters

Core

Iron, nickel metal Same, but core is
What portion of each body is
much smaller
core?
Sediment or
Silicon and
Silicon and oxygen
Do you think life ever existed
Regolith
oxygen bound in bound in minerals,
on the Moon?
minerals that
glass produced by
Why or why not?
contain water,
meteorite impacts,
plus organic
small amounts of
materials.
gases (e.g., hydrogen)
implanted by the solar
wind. No water or
organic materials.
Atmosphere
78 % nitrogen,
Basically none. Some Could you breathe the lunar
(main
21 % oxygen
carbon gases (CO2 , atmosphere?
constituents)
CO, and methane),
but very little of them.
Pressure is about onetrillionth of Earth's
atmospheric pressure.
Length of day 23.93 hours
How long does daylight last
27.3 Earth days
(sidereal
on the Moon?
rotation
period)
Air temperature
Surface
Surface temperature Why are the temperatures of
ranges from
temperature
ranges from -193oC Earth and the Moon so
-88oC (winter in
different?
(night in polar
o
polar regions) to
regions) to 111 C
o
58 C (summer in (day in equatorial
tropical regions). regions).
Surface
features

18

25 % land
(seven continents)
with varied terrain
of mountains,
plains, river valleys. Ocean floor
characterized by
mountains, plains.

84 % heavily-cratered Compare maps of Earth and
highlands.
the Moon. Is there any
16 % basalt-covered evidence that plate tectonics
maria.
operated on the Moon?
Impact craters-some with bright rays,
crater chains, and
rilles.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

