Teacher’s Guide
THE MOON
GATEWAY TO THE SOLAR SYSTEM
G. Jeffrey Taylor, PhD

WHEN ASTRONAUTS dug into the
Moon’s surface during the Apollo program,
they were doing more than digging up dry, dark
sediment. They were time travelers. The rocks
and sediment returned by Apollo contain vital
clues to how Earth and the Moon formed, the
nature and timing of early melting, the intensity
of impact bombardment and its variation with
time, and even the history of the Sun. Most of
this information, crucial parts of the story of
planet Earth, cannot be learned by studying
rocks on Earth because our planet is so geologically active that it has erased much of the
record. The clues have been lost in billions of
years of mountain building, volcanism, weathering, and erosion. Colliding tectonic plates
The Moon, front and back
The top right photograph is a telescopic image of the Earth-facing half
of the Moon obtained at Lick Observatory in California. The one below
right was taken during the Apollo 16 mission and shows mostly the farside,
except for the dark areas on the left, which can be seen, though barely,
from Earth. The two major types of terrain are clearly visible. Thehighlands,
which are especially well displayed in the photograph of the farside, are
light-colored and heavily cratered. The maria are darker and smoother;
they formed when lava flows filled depressions. One of the mysteries about
the Moon is why fewer maria occur on the farside than nearside. Note
how many craters stand shoulder to shoulder on the farside. These
immense holes chronicle the Moon’s early bombardment, an intense
barrage that probably affected the early Earth as well.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

1

and falling rain have erased much of Earth history,
especially the early years before four billion years ago.
The Moon was geologically active in its heyday,
producing a fascinating array of products, but its
geologic engine was not vigorous and all records of
early events were not lost. Its secrets are recorded in
its craters, plains, and rocks. This guide reveals the
secrets that lunar scientists have uncovered since the
Apollo missions returned 382 kilograms (843 pounds)
of rock and sediment from the lovely body that
graces the night sky.
The emphasis here is on geology. The samples
returned by Apollo are the stars of the show. [See the
“Lunar Disk” activity on Pages 39–42 and the
“Apollo Landing Sites” activity on Pages 43–46.]
Understanding the Moon, however, requires other
geological approaches, such as geological mapping
from high-quality photographs, the study of analogous features on Earth (for instance, impact craters),
and experiments in laboratories.
THE LUNAR LANDSCAPE
The Moon is not like Earth. It does not have oceans,
lakes, rivers, or streams. It does not have wind-blown
ice fields at its poles. Roses and morning glories do not
sprout from its charcoal gray, dusty surface. Redwoods do not tower above its cratered ground. Dinosaur foot prints cannot be found. Paramecium never
conjugated, amoeba never split, and dogs never
barked. The wind never blew. People never lived
there—but they have wondered about it for centuries, and a few lucky ones have even visited it.
Highlands and lowlands
The major features of the Moon’s surface can be
seen by just looking up at it. It has lighter and darker
areas. These distinctive terrains are the bright lunar
highlands (also known as the lunar terrae, which is
Latin for “land”) and the darker plains called the
lunar maria, Latin for “seas,” which they resembled
to Thomas Hariot and Galileo Galilei, the first scientists to examine the Moon with telescopes. The
names terrae and maria were given to lunar terrains
by Hariot and Galileo’s contemporary, Johannes
Kepler. In fact, the idea that the highlands and maria
correspond to lands and seas appears to have been
popular among ancient Greeks long before tele-

2

scopes were invented. Although we now know they
are not seas (the Moon never had any water), we still
use the term maria, and its singular form, mare.
The highlands and craters
Closer inspection shows that the highlands comprise countless overlapping craters, ranging in size
from the smallest visible in photographs (1 meter on
the best Apollo photographs) to more than 1000 km.
Essentially all of these craters formed when meteorites crashed into the Moon. Before either robotic or
piloted spacecraft went to the Moon, many scientists
thought that most lunar craters were volcanic in
origin. But as we found out more about the nature of
lunar craters and studied impact craters on Earth, it
became clear that the Moon has been bombarded by
cosmic projectiles. The samples returned by the
Apollo missions confirmed the pervasive role impact
processes play in shaping the lunar landscape.
The term “meteorite impact” is used to describe
the process of surface bombardment by cosmic object. The objects themselves are variously referred to
as “impactors” or “projectiles.”
The impact process is explosive. A large impactor does not simply bore its way into a planet’s
surface. When it hits, it is moving extremely fast,
more than 20 km/sec (70,000 km/hour). This meeting is not tender. High-pressure waves are sent back
into the impactor and into the target planet. The
impactor is so overwhelmed by the passage of the
shock wave that almost all of it vaporizes, never to be
seen again. The target material is compressed strongly,
then decompressed. A little is vaporized, some melted,
but most (a mass of about 10,000 times the mass of
the impactor) is tossed out of the target area, piling up
around the hole so produced. The bottom of the crater
is lower than the original ground surface, the piled up
material on the rim is higher. This is the characteristic
shape of an impact crater and is different from
volcanic calderas (no piled up materials) or cinder
cones (the central pit is above the original ground
surface). A small amount of the target is also tossed
great distances along arcuate paths called rays.
Real impacts cannot be readily simulated in a
classroom. In fact, there are very few facilities where
we can simulate high-velocity impacts. Nevertheless,
classroom experiments using marbles, ball bearings,
or other objects can still illustrate many important

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

points about the impact process. For example, objects impacting at a variety of
velocities (hence kinetic energies) produce
craters with a variety of sizes; the more
energy, the larger the crater. [See the “Impact Craters” activity on Pages 61–70.]
The maria
The maria cover 16% of the lunar surface and are composed of lava flows that
filled relatively low places, mostly inside
immense impact basins. So, although the
Moon does not have many volcanic craters, it did experience volcanic activity.
Close examination of the relationships between the highlands and the maria shows
that this activity took place after the highlands formed and after most of the cratering
took place. Thus, the maria are younger than
the highlands. [See the “Clay Lava Flows”
activity on Pages 71–76 and the “Lava Layering” activity on Pages 77–82.]
How do we know that the dark plains
are covered with lava flows? Why not some
other kind of rock? Even before the Apollo
missions brought back samples from the
maria, there were strong suspicions that the
plains were volcanic. They contain some
features that look very much like lava flows.
Other features resemble lava channels, Rivers or lava channels?
which form in some types of lava flows on The origin of river-like valleys, called rilles, was debated before the Apollo 15 mission visited one of
Earth. Still other features resemble col- them, Hadley Rille, shown here from orbit (white arrow shows the landing site) and from the lunar
lapses along underground volcanic fea- surface. Some scientists argued that rilles were river valleys, implying that the Moon had flowing
tures called lava tubes. These and other water at one time. Others thought that rilles resembled the channels that form in lava flows.
features convinced most lunar scientists Observations by the Apollo 15 crew and samples returned settled the argument: rilles are volcanic
before the Apollo missions that the maria features.
were lava plains. This insight was confirmed by samples collected from the maria: they logic mapping using high-quality telescopic images,
are a type of volcanic rock called basalt.
showed that the mare must be considerably younger
The maria fill many of the gigantic impact basins than the basins in which they reside. For example, the
that decorate the Moon’s nearside. (The Moon keeps impact that formed the large Imbrium basin (the
the same hemisphere towards Earth because Earth’s Man-in-the-Moon’s right eye) hurled material outgravity has locked in the Moon’s rotation.) Some wards and sculpted the mountains surrounding the
scientists contended during the 1960s that this dem- Serenitatis basin (the left eye); thus, Serenitatis must
onstrated a cause and effect: impact caused not only be older. The Serenitatis basin is also home to Mare
the formation of a large crater but led to melting of the Serenitatis. If the lavas in Mare Serentatis formed
lunar interior as well. Thus, it was argued, the im- when the basin did, they ought to show the effects of
pacts triggered the volcanism. However, careful geo- the giant impact that formed Imbrium. They show no
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

3

Maria mysteries
Some mysteries persist about the maria. For one,
why are volcanoes missing except for the cinder
cones associated with dark mantle deposits? Second, if no obvious volcanoes exist, where did the
lavas erupt from? In some cases, we can see that lava
emerged from the margins of enormous impact basins, perhaps along cracks concentric to the basin.
But in most cases, we cannot see the places where the
lava erupted. Another curious feature is that almost
all the maria occur on the Earth-facing side of the
Moon. Most scientists guess that this asymmetry is
caused by the highlands crust being thicker on the
lunar farside, making it difficult for basalts to make
it all the way through to the surface. [See the “Moon
Anomalies” activity on Pages 91–98.]

Lava flows dribbling across Mare Imbrium
Long lava flows (lower left to upper right through center of photo) in Mare Imbrium.
The flows are up to 400 kilometers long (the entire extent is not shown in this Apollo

THE DUSTY LUNAR SURFACE

photograph) and have 30-meter high cliffs at their margins. The ridges running roughly
perpendicular to the flows are called wrinkle ridges. The ridges formed after the
flows because they did not impede the advance of the lava flow. The smooth plains
surrounding the prominent lava flows are also lava, but older, so the margins are
harder to see. The craters on the right along the ridge are about 5 kilometers in
diameter.

signs of it. Furthermore, the maria contain far fewer
craters than do basin deposits, hence have been
around a shorter time (the older the surface, the
greater the number of craters). The Apollo samples,
of course, confirmed these astute geological observations and showed that the maria filling some basins
formed a billion years after the basin formed.
One other type of deposit associated with the
maria, though it blankets highlands areas as well, is
known as dark mantle deposits. They cannot be seen
except with telescopes or from spacecraft near the
Moon, but are important nonetheless. Before Apollo,
most scientists believed that the dark mantle deposits
were formed by explosive volcanic eruptions known
as pyroclastic eruptions (literally, “pieces of fire”).
Some deposits seemed to be associated with low,
broad, dark cinder cones, consistent with the idea that
they were formed by pyroclastic eruptions—this is
how cinder cones form on Earth. This bit of geologic
deduction was proven by the Apollo 17 mission and
its sampling of the “orange soil,” a collection of tiny
glass droplets like those found in terrestrial pyroclastic eruptions.

4

Some visitors to Kilauea Volcano, Hawai‘i, have
been overheard to say, upon seeing a vast landscape
covered with fresh lava, “It looks just like the Moon.”
Well, it doesn’t. The fresh lava flows of Kilauea and
other active volcanoes are usually dark grayish and
barren like the Moon, but the resemblance ends
there. The lunar surface is charcoal gray and sandy,
with a sizable supply of fine sediment. Meteorite
impacts over billions of years have ground up the
formerly fresh surfaces into powder. Because the
Moon has virtually no atmosphere, even the tiniest
meteorite strikes a defenseless surface at its full
cosmic velocity, at least 20 km/sec. Some rocks lie
strewn about the surface, resembling boulders sticking up through fresh snow on the slopes of Aspen or
Vail. Even these boulders won’t last long, maybe a
few hundred million years, before they are ground up
into powder by the relentless rain of high-speed
projectiles. Of course, an occasional larger impactor
arrives, say the size of a car, and excavates fresh rock
from beneath the blanket of powdery sediment. The
meteoritic rain then begins to grind the fresh boulders
down, slowly but inevitably.
The powdery blanket that covers the Moon is
called the lunar regolith, a term for mechanically
produced debris layers on planetary surfaces. Many
scientists also call it the “lunar soil,” but it contains
none of the organic matter that occurs in soils on
Earth. Some people use the term “sediment” for

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

regolith. Be forewarned that the regolith
samples in the Lunar Sample Disk are
labeled “soil.” Although it is everywhere,
the regolith is thin, ranging from about
two meters on the youngest maria to
perhaps 20 meters in the oldest surfaces
in the highlands. [See the “Regolith Formation” activity on Pages 47–52.]
Lunar regolith is a mixed blessing.
On the one hand, it has mixed local
material so that a shovelful contains most
of the rock types that occur in an area. It
even contains some rock fragments tossed
in by impacts in remote regions. Thus,
the regolith is a great rock collection. It
also contains the record of impacts during the past several hundred million to
a billion years, crucial information for
understanding the rate of impact on
Earth during that time. On the other
hand, this impact record is not written
very clearly and we have not come close
to figuring it out as yet. The blanket of
regolith also greatly obscures the details
of the bedrock geology. This made field
work during Apollo difficult and hinders
our understanding of lunar history.
The regolith consists of what you’d
expect from an impact-generated pile
of debris. It contains rock and mineral
fragments derived from the original bedrock. It also contains glassy particles
formed by the impacts. In many lunar
regoliths, half of the particles are composed of mineral fragments that are bound
together by impact glass; scientists call
these objects agglutinates. The chemical composition of the regolith reflects
the composition of the bedrock underneath. Regolith in the highlands is rich
in aluminum, as are highland rocks.
Regolith in the maria is rich in iron and
magnesium, major constituents of basalt. A little bit of mixing from beneath
basalt layers or from distant highland
locales occurs, but not enough to obscure the basic difference between the
highlands and the maria.

Raking moon dirt
One of the most useful ways of obtaining samples of Moon rocks was to drag a rake through the
regolith. This allowed rock fragments larger than about one centimeter to remain on tines of the rake,
while smaller fragments fell through. Note the large range in the sizes of rock fragments. One large
boulder lies near the rake, a medium-sized one is visible between the astronaut’s feet, along with
countless other pebbles. Most of the regolith is smaller than fine sand. The astronaut’s footprints are
distinct because the regolith is composed of a large percentage of tiny particles (about 20% is smaller
than 0.02 millimeters).

A geologist-astronaut does field work on the Moon
Geologist Harrison H. Schmitt examines a large rock at the Apollo 17 landing site. This large boulder
contains numerous rock fragments that were smashed together by the huge impact event that made
the 750-kilometer Serentatis basin on the Moon.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

5

One of the great potential bits of information
stored in the complex pile atop the lunar surface is the
history of the Sun. The nearest star puts out prodigious amounts of particles called the solar wind.
Composed mostly of hydrogen, helium, neon, carbon, and nitrogen, the solar wind particles strike the
lunar surface and are implanted into mineral grains.
The amounts build up with time. In principle, we can
determine if conditions inside the Sun have changed
over time by analyzing these solar wind products,
especially the isotopic composition of them.
The same solar wind gases may prove useful
when people establish permanent settlements on the
Moon. Life support systems require the life-giving
elements: hydrogen and oxygen (for water), carbon,
and nitrogen. Plenty of oxygen is bound in the
silicate, minerals of lunar rocks (about 50% by volume) and the solar wind provided the rest. So, when
the astronauts were digging up lunar regolith for
return to Earth, they were not merely sampling—
they were prospecting!

MOON ROCKS
Geologists learn an amazing amount about a
planet by examining photographs and using other
types of remotely sensed data, but eventually they
need to collect some samples. For example, although
geologists determined unambigously from photographs that the maria are younger than the highlands,
they did not know their absolute age, the age in years.
Rocks also provide key tests to hypotheses. For
instance, the maria were thought to be covered with
lava flows, but we did not know for sure until we
collected samples from them. Also, no method can
accurately determine the chemical and mineralogical composition of a rock except laboratory analysis.
Most important, samples provide surprises, telling
us things we never expected. The highlands provide
the best example of a geological surprise, and one
with great consequences for our understanding of
what Earth was like 4.5 billion years ago.

A fist-sized piece of the original lunar crust
This rock sample was collected during the Apollo 15 mission. It is an anorthosite, a

Smash and mix, mix and melt

rock composed of little else but the mineral feldspar. Anorthosites formed from the

This rock returned by the Apollo 16 mission attests to the effects of impacts on a

enormous magma system, the lunar magma ocean, that surrounded the newly

planet’s crust. It is a hodgepodge of rock and mineral fragments, some of which

formed Moon. Because of its importance in understanding the origin of the Moon’s

themselves are complicated mishmashes of rock debris. Geologists call these

crust, the rock was nicknamed the “genesis rock.”

complicated rocks breccias.

6

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Highland rocks, the lunar magma
ocean, and maybe a cataclysm

Hawai'i developed a method to determine the iron
content of the lunar surface from ratioes of the
intensity of light reflected in different wavelengths.
Strange as it may seem, the first highland rocks The magma ocean hypothesis predicts that the lunar
were collected during the first lunar landing, the highlands should have low iron contents, less than
Apollo 11 mission, which landed on a mare, Mare about 5 wt. % (when recorded as iron oxide, FeO).
Tranquillitatis. Although most of the rocks collected According to Clementine measurements, the highwere, indeed, basalts, some millimeter-sized rock lands average slightly under 5 wt. % FeO, consistent
fragments were quite different. They were composed with the magma ocean idea. Further refinement of
chiefly of the mineral plagioclase feldspar; some this test is underway using data from Clementine and
fragments were composed of nothing but plagio- the forthcoming U. S. Lunar Prospector Mission,
clase. [See the “Rock ABCs Fact Sheet” on Page 19.] scheduled for launch in early 1998.
Such rocks are called anorthosites. Some scientists
The highlands also contain other types of igneous
suggested that these fragments were blasted to the rocks. The most abundant are called norites and
Apollo 11 landing site by distant impacts on highland troctolites, rocks composed of equal amounts of
terrain. Thus, they argued, the highlands are loaded plagioclase and either olivine or pyroxene (both
with plagioclase. This was a bold extrapolation con- silicate minerals containing iron and magnesium).
firmed by subsequent Apollo missions to highland Age dating suggests that these rocks are slightly
sites.
younger than the anorthosites and formed after the
But this was not enough for some scientists. If magma ocean had crystallized.
the highlands are enriched in plagioclase, how did
Highland rocks are difficult to work with because
they get that way? One way is to accumulate it by all that cratering, so evident in photographs of the
flotation in a magma (molten rock). This happens highlands, has taken its toll on the rocks. Most
in thick subterranean magma bodies on Earth. highland rocks are complex mixtures of other rocks.
So, plagioclase floated in a magma. But if ALL the The original igneous rocks have been melted, mixed,
lunar highlands are enriched in
plagioclase, then the magma must
have been all over the Moon. The
early Moon must have been covered by a global ocean of magma,
now commonly referred to as the
lunar magma ocean. Although
some scientists still remain
unconvinced about the veracity
of the magma ocean hypothesis,
nothing we have learned since has contradicted the smashed, and generally abused by impacts during the
idea that 4.5 billion years ago the Moon was covered Moon’s first half billion years. We call these compliby a layer of magma hundreds of kilometers thick. cated rocks breccias. Some are so mixed up that they
The idea has been extended to the young Earth as contain breccias within breccias within breccias.
well, and even to Mars and some asteroids. And all Most of the anorthosites, norites, and troctolites are
this sprung forth because creative and bold scientists actually rock fragments inside breccias. Separating
saw special importance in a few dozen white frag- them out is painstaking work.
ments of anorthosite strewn about in a pile of charAn interesting thing about highland breccias,
coal gray lunar regolith.
especially those we call impact melt breccias (rocks
The magma ocean concept was tested by the partly melted by an impact event), is that most of
1994 U. S. Clementine Mission to the Moon. them fall into a relatively narrow span of ages, from
Clementine was in a pole-to-pole orbit for two months, about 3.85 to 4.0 billion years. This has led some
during which it took thousands of photographs in scientists to propose (boldly again–lunar scientists
several wavelengths. Scientists at the University of don’t seem to be timid!) that the Moon was
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

7

bombarded with exceptional intensity during that
narrow time interval. If it happened, it probably
affected Earth as well, perhaps leading to production
of the first sedimentary basins, and possibly inhibiting the formation of the first life on this planet or
harming whatever life had developed by four billion
years ago. This idea of a cataclysmic bombardment
of the Moon is not yet proven. It could be that the
apparent clustering in rock ages reflects poor sampling—we may only have obtained samples from
one or two large impact basins. The idea can be tested
by obtaining samples from many more localities on
the Moon.

potassium (chemical symbol K), rare-earth elements
(abbreviated REE), and phosphorus (P). Most Moon
specialists believe that KREEP represents the last
dregs from the crystallization of the magma ocean.
Huge impacts dug down to the lower crust of the
Moon and excavated it, mixing it with other debris
to form KREEPy breccias.
The maria:
lava flows and fountains of fire
The missions to mare areas brought back lots of
samples of basalt. Basalts differ from the highlands
rocks in having more olivine and pyroxene, and less

A piece of a lava flow
This typical sample of a mare basalt is composed mostly of brown pyroxene (grayish
in the photo) and white feldspar. The holes in the sample are frozen gas bubbles.
Some basalt samples have many such bubbles (called vesicles by geologists),
whereas others have none.

Multi-ringed masterpieces
The Moon has about 35 multi-ringed, circular impact features larger than 300 km in
diameter. The one shown here, the Orientale basin, has three very prominent rings.
The diameter of the outer one is 930 km. These immense craters might all have
formed in a narrow time interval between 3.85 and 4.0 billion years ago. Scientists
do not know for sure how the rings form during the impact.

Many highland breccias and a few igneous rocks
are enriched compared to other lunar samples in a
set of elements not familiar to most of us. The
elements are those that tend not to enter the abundant
minerals in rocks. The result is that as a magma
crystallizes the part that is still liquid becomes
progressively richer in these special elements. The
rocks that contain them are called KREEP, for

8

plagioclase. Many of them also have surprisingly
large amounts of an iron-titanium oxide mineral
called ilmenite. The first batch had so much ilmenite
(and some other related minerals) that they were
called “high-titanium” mare basalts, in honor of the
exceptional titanium contents compared to terrestrial
basalts. The second mission, Apollo 12, returned
basalts with lower titanium concentrations, so they
were called “low-titanium” mare basalts. Subsequent missions, including an automated samplereturn mission sent by the Soviet Union, returned
some mare basalts with even lower titanium, so
they were dubbed “very-low-titanium” basalts. Most
scientists figure that mare basalts have a complete
range in titanium abundance. Data from the U. S.
Clementine Mission confirm this, and show that the

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Experiments conducted on
mare basalts and pyroclastic
glasses show that they formed
when the interior of the Moon
partially melted. (Rocks do not
have a single melting temperature like pure substances. Instead
they melt over a range of temperatures: 1000–1200°C for
some basalts, for example.) The experiments also
high-titanium basalts are not really very common on show that the melting took place at depths ranging
the Moon.
from 100 to 500 km, and that the rocks that partially
The shapes of the mineral grains and how they melted contained mostly olivine and pyroxene, with
are intergrown in mare basalts indicate that these some ilmenite in the regions that formed the highrocks formed in lava flows, some thin (perhaps a titanium basalts. An involved but sensible chain of
meter thick), others thicker (up to perhaps 30 meters). reasoning indicates that these deep rocks rich in
This is not unusual for basalt flows on Earth. Many olivine and pyroxene formed from the lunar magma
lunar mare basalts also contain holes, called vesicles, ocean: while plagioclase floated to form anorthosites
which were formed by gas bubbles trapped when the in the highlands crust, the denser minerals olivine
lava solidified. Earth basalts also have them. On and pyroxene sank. So, although the anorthosites and
Earth, the abundant gases escaping from the lava are mare basalts differ drastically in age and composicarbon dioxide and water vapor, accompanied by tion, the origins are intimately connected.
some sulfur and chlorine gases. We are not as sure
what gases escaped from lunar lavas, although we
What’s next?
know that water vapor was not one of them because
there are no hints for the presence of water or waterScientists are still working on the bounty returned
bearing minerals in any Moon rock. The best bet is a by the Apollo missions. New analytical techniques
mixture of carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide, and improved understanding of how geological prowith some sulfur gases added for good measure.
cesses work keep the field exciting and vibrant.
On Earth, when the amount of gas dissolved in Eventually we will need additional samples and
magma (the name for lava still underground) be- some extensive field work to fully understand the
comes large, it escapes violently and causes an Moon and how it came to be and continues to evolve.
explosive eruption. In places such as Hawai‘i, for These sampling and field expeditions will probably
example, the lava erupts in large fountains up to be done by a combination of robotic and piloted
several hundred meters high. The lava falls to the spacecraft.
ground in small pieces, producing a pyroclastic deIn the meantime, Nature has provided a bonus:
posit. This also happened on the Moon, producing samples from the Moon come to us free of charge in
the dark mantle deposits. One of these was sampled the form of lunar meteorites. (See companion voldirectly during the Apollo 17 mission. The sample, ume Exploring Meteorite Mysteries.) Thirteen sepacalled the “orange soil,” consists of numerous small rate meteorites have been identified so far, one found
orange glass beads. They are glass because they in Australia and the rest in Antarctica. We are sure
cooled rapidly, so there was not enough time to form that they come from the Moon on the basis of
and grow crystals in them.
appearance and chemical and isotopic composition,
Small samples of pyroclastic glasses were also but of course we do not know from where on the
found at other sites. Some are green, others yellow, Moon they come. These samples have helped supstill others red. The differences in color reflect the port the magma ocean idea. Most important, knowamount of titanium they contain. The green have the ing that meteorites can be delivered to Earth by
least (about 1 weight percent) and the red contain the impacts on the Moon lends credence to the idea that
most (14 weight percent), more than even the highest we have some meteorites from Mars. The Martian
titanium basalt.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

9

meteorites are collectively called SNC meteorites. If
we did not know so much about the Moon we would
never have been able to identify meteorites from the
Moon, and, therefore, would not have been able to
argue as convincingly that some meteorites come
from Mars.

From the Moon, free of charge
The first lunar meteorite discovered in Antarctica hails from the lunar highlands and,
like most highlands rocks, it is an impact breccia. The lunar meteorites prove that
objects can be blasted off sizable objects without melting them, adding credence to
the idea that a group of twelve meteorites comes from Mars.

MOONQUAKES, THE MOON’S
INTERIOR, AND THE MYSTERIOUS
MAGNETIC FIELD
The Moon does not shake, rattle, and roll as Earth
does. Almost all moonquakes are smaller than Earth’s
constant grumblings. The largest quakes reach only
about magnitude 5 (strong enough to cause dishes to
fall out of cabinets), and these occur about once a
year. This is clear evidence that the Moon is not at
present geologically active. No internal motions
drive crustal plates as on Earth, or initiate hot spots
to give rise to volcanic provinces like Hawai‘i. This
seismic inactivity is a wonderful virtue in the eyes
of astronomers. Combined with the lack of an
atmosphere to cause stars to twinkle, the low moonquake activity makes the Moon an ideal place to
install telescopes.
We know about moonquakes from four seis-

10

mometers set up by the Apollo missions. Besides
telling us how many and how strong moonquakes
are, the data acquired by the Apollo seismic network
help us figure out something about the nature of the
Moon’s interior. On Earth, seismology has allowed
us to know that the planet has a thin crust (20-60 km
over continents, 8-10 km over ocean basins), a thick
silicate mantle (down to 2900 km), and a large
metallic iron core (2900 km to the center at 6370 km).
The Moon is quite different. The crust is thicker than
Earth’s continental crust, ranging from 70 km on the
Earth-facing side to perhaps 150 km on the farside.
The mare basalts represent a thin veneer on this
mostly plagioclase-rich crust, averaging only about 1
km in thickness (inferred mostly from photogeological
studies). Evidence from samples collected on the
rims of the large basins Imbrium and Serentatis and
from remote sensing instruments carried onboard
two Apollo missions, the Clementine Mission, and
the forthcoming Lunar Prospector Mission suggest
that the lower crust may not contain as much plagioclase as does the upper half of the crust. Beneath the
crust is the lunar mantle, which is the largest part of
the Moon. There might be a difference in rock types
above and below a depth of 500 km, perhaps representing the depth of the lunar magma ocean. Beneath
the mantle lies a small lunar core made of metallic
iron. The size of the core is highly uncertain, with
estimates ranging from about 100 km to 400 km.
That little core is important, though. The Moon
does not have much of a magnetic field, so the lunar
core is not generating magnetism the way Earth’s
core is. Nevertheless, it did in the past. Lunar rocks
are magnetized, and the strength of the magnetic field
has been measured by special techniques. Also, older
rocks have stronger magnetism, suggesting that the
Moon’s magnetic field was stronger in the distant
past, and then decreased to its weak present state.
Why this happened is unknown. What is known is
this: you cannot navigate around the Moon using a
compass!
There are other mysteries about the Moon’s
magnetism. Although the field was always weak and
is extremely weak now, there are small areas on the
Moon that have magnetic fields much stronger than
the surrounding regions. These magnetic anomalies
have not been figured out. Some scientists have
associated them with the effects of large, basinforming impacts. Others have suggested that the

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Moon forming together, a two-body
system from the start. This idea has
trouble explaining Earth’s rotation
rate and how the moon-forming
material got into orbit around Earth
and stayed there, rather than falling
to Earth. (These problems with total amount of spinning involve both
Earth’s rotation and the Moon’s
motion around Earth. The amount
of rotation and revolving is
quantified by a physical property
called angular momentum.) The
problem was so frustrating that
some scientists suggested that
maybe science had proved that the
Moon does not exist!
The annoying problems with
the
classical hypotheses of lunar
Inside the Moon and Earth
origin led scientists to consider alScientists have learned what Earth and the Moon are like inside by several techniques, the most important
ternatives. This search led to the
of which is seismology, the study of earthquake (and, of course) moonquake waves. Earth has a much
seemingly outlandish idea that the
larger metallic core than does the Moon.
Moon formed when a projectile the
ionized gases produced when comets impact the size of the planet Mars (half Earth’s radius and oneMoon might give rise to strong magnetic anomalies tenth its mass) smashed into Earth when it had grown
in the crater ejecta. The jury is still out. The Lunar to about 90% of its present size. The resulting exploProspector Mission will thoroughly map the distri- sion sent vast quantities of heated material into orbit
bution of magnetic anomalies, perhaps helping to around Earth, and the Moon formed from this debris.
This new hypothesis, which blossomed in 1984 from
solve this mystery.
seeds planted in the mid-1970s, is called the giant
THE MOON’S ORIGIN: A BIG WHACK impact theory. It explains the way Earth spins and
why Earth has a larger metallic core than does the
ON THE GROWING EARTH
Moon. Furthermore, modern theories for how the
For a long time, the most elusive mystery about planets are assembled from smaller bodies, which
the Moon was how it formed. The problem baffled were assembled from still smaller ones, predict that
philosophers and scientists for hundreds of years. All when Earth was almost done forming, there would
of the hypotheses advanced for lunar origin had fatal have been a body nearby with a mass about one-tenth
flaws, even though partisans tried tenaciously to that of Earth. Thus, the giant impact hypothesized to
explain away the defects. The capture hypothesis, have formed the Moon is not an implausible event.
which depicts capture of a fully formed Moon by The chances are so high, in fact, that it might have
Earth, suffered from improbability. Close encounter been unavoidable.
One would think that an impact between an
with Earth would either result in a collision or fling
the Moon into a different orbit around the Sun, almost Earth-sized planet and a Mars-sized planet
probably never to meet up with Earth again. The would be catastrophic. The energy involved is infission hypothesis, in which the primitive Earth spins comprehensible. Much more than a trillion trillion
so fast that a blob flies off, could not explain how tons of material vaporized and melted. In some
Earth got to be spinning so fast (once every 2.5 hours) places in the cloud around the Earth, temperatures
and why Earth and the Moon no longer spin that fast. exceeded 10,000°C. A fledgling planet the size of
The double-planet hypothesis pictures Earth and the Mars was incorporated into Earth, its metallic core
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

11

and all, never to be seen again. Yes, this sounds
catastrophic. But out of it all, the Moon was created
and Earth grew to almost its final size. Without this
violent event early in the Solar System’s history,
there would be no Moon in Earth’s sky, and Earth
would not be rotating as fast as it is because the big
impact spun it up. Days might even last a year. But
then, maybe we would not be here to notice.

was at least 500 km deep. The first minerals to form
in this mind-boggling magmatic system were the
iron and magnesium silicates olivine and pyroxene.
They were denser than the magma, so they sank, like
rocks in a pond, though not as fast. Eventually,
plagioclase feldspar formed, and because it was less
dense than the magma, began to float to the top, like
bubbles in cola. It accumulated and produced mountains of anorthosite, producing the first lunar crust.
The magma ocean phase ended by about 4.4 billion
years ago. [See the “Differentiation” activity on
Pages 57–60.]

WHACK!
The Moon may have formed when an object the size of the planet Mars smashed
into Earth when our future home was about 90% constructed. This fierce event
made Earth larger and blasted off vaporized and melted material into orbit. The
Moon formed from this debris. This painting was created by William K. Hartmann,
one of the scientists who invented the giant impact hypothesis for lunar origin.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE MOON
Sinking and floating in an ocean of magma

We know the general outlines of what happened
to the Moon after it was formed by a giant impact.
The first notable event, which may have been a
consequence of the giant impact, was the formation
and crystallization of the magma ocean. Nobody
knows how deep it was, but the best guess is that it

12

Soon after it formed, the Moon was surrounded by a huge shell of molten rock
called the lunar magma ocean. As crystals formed in it, the denser ones such as
olivine and pyroxene sank and the less dense ones, such as feldspar, floated
upwards, forming the original anorthosite crust on the Moon. Dropping toothpicks
and pennies into a glass of water shows the process: the toothpicks (representing
feldspar) float and the pennies (olivine and pyroxene) sink.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Almost as soon as the crust had formed, perhaps
while it was still forming, other types of magmas that
would form the norites and troctolites in the highlands crust began to form deep in the Moon. A great
mystery is where inside the Moon and how deep.
Many lunar specialists believe the magmas derived
from unmelted Moon stuff beneath the magma ocean.
In any case, these magmas rose and infiltrated the
anorthosite crust, forming large and small rock bodies, and perhaps even erupting onto the surface.
Some of the magmas reacted chemically with the
dregs of the magma ocean (KREEP) and others may
have dissolved some of the anorthosite. This period
of lunar history ended about 4.0 billion years ago.
All during these first epochs, left-over projectiles
continued to bombard the Moon, modifying the
rocks soon after they formed. The crust was mixed to
a depth of at least a few kilometers, perhaps as much
as 20 km, as if a gigantic tractor had plowed the lunar
crust. Though not yet proven, the rate of impact may
have declined between 4.5 and 4.0 billion years ago,
but then grew dramatically, producing most of the large
basins visible on the Moon. This cataclysmic bombardment is postulated to have lasted from 4.0 to 3.85
billion years ago. [See the “Impact Craters” activity
on Pages 61–70, and the “Regolith Formation”
activity on Pages 47–52.]
Once the bombardment rate had settled down,
the maria could form. Basalts like those making up
the dark mare surfaces formed before 3.85 billion
years ago, but not as voluminously as later, and the
enormous bombardment rate demolished whatever
lava plains formed. However, between 3.7 and about
2.5 billion years ago (the lower limit is highly uncertain), lavas flowed across the lunar surface, forming
the maria and decorating the Moon’s face. Along with
the basalts came pyroclastic eruptions, high fountains of fire that launched glowing droplets of molten
basalt on flights up to a few hundred kilometers.
Since mare volcanism ceased, impact has been
the only geological force at work on the Moon. Some
impressive craters have been made, such as
Copernicus (90 km across) and Tycho (85 km).
These flung bright rays of material across the dark
lunar landscape, adding more decoration. In fact,
some of the material blasted from Tycho caused a
debris slide at what would become the Apollo 17
landing site. Samples from this site indicate that the
landslide and some associated craters formed about

110 million years ago. This, therefore, is the age of
the crater Tycho. It is a triumph of geological savvy
that we were able to date an impact crater that lies
over 2000 km from the place we landed!
The impacts during the past billions of years also
have mixed the upper several meters of crust to make
the powdery lunar regolith. The Sun has continued to
implant a tiny amount of itself into the regolith,
giving us its cryptic record and providing resources
for future explorers. And recently, only seconds ago
in geologic time, a few interplanetary travelers left
their footprints here and there on the dusty ground.

Anatomy of an impact crater
The crater Tycho in the southern highlands on the lunar nearside is 85 kilometers
across. Its terraced walls rise 3 to 4 kilometers above its floor. Its rim rises above the
surrounding terrain, and its floor sits below it. Smooth material on the floor of the
crater consists of impact-melted rock that flowed like lava across the growing floor
in the later stages of excavation. In response to the huge increase then decrease in
pressure, mountains two kilometers high rose from its floor, bringing up material
from as much as ten kilometers in the crust. The blanket of material surrounding the
crater is called the ejecta blanket; this pile of debris becomes progressively thinner
away from the crater (especially evident on the left of the photo).

Although not visible on this photograph, large craters like Tycho also have rays
emanating from them. Rays form when materials thrown out of the crater land and
excavate more of the lunar landscape along arcuate paths. The Tycho event caused
a landslide and several secondary impacts at the Apollo 17 landing site, over 2000
kilometers away. Analysis of samples collected during the Apollo 17 mission indicates
that these events took place 110 million years ago. Thus, Tycho formed 110 million
years ago.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

13

THE MOON AND EARTH:
INEXORABLY INTERTWINED
The Moon ought to be especially alluring to
people curious about Earth. The two bodies formed
near each other, formed mantles and crusts early,
shared the same post-formational bombardment, and
have been bathed in the same flux of sunlight and
solar particles for the past 4.5 billion years. Here are
a few examples of the surprising ways in which lunar
science can contribute to understanding how Earth
works and to unraveling its geological history.
Origin of the Earth-Moon System. No matter how
the Moon formed, its creation must have had dramatic effects on Earth. Although most scientists have
concluded that the Moon formed as a result of an
enormous impact onto the growing Earth, we do not
know much about the details of that stupendous
event. We do not know if the Moon was made mostly
from Earth materials or mostly projectile, the kinds
of chemical reactions that would have taken place in
the melt-vapor cloud, and precisely how the Moon
was assembled from this cloud.
Magma oceans. The concept that the Moon had a
magma ocean has been a central tenet of lunar science since it sprung from fertile minds after the
return of the first lunar samples in 1969. It is now
being applied to Earth, Mars, and asteroids. This
view of the early stages of planet development is
vastly different from the view in the 1950s and
1960s. Back then, most (not all) scientists believed
the planets assembled cold, and then heated up. The
realization that the Moon had a magma ocean changed
all that and has led to a whole new way of looking at
Earth’s earliest history.

extinctions are not understood. One possibility is that
some mass-extinction events were caused by periodic increases in the rate of impact on Earth. For
example, the mass extinctions, which included the
demise of the dinosaurs, at the end of the Cretaceous
period (65 million years ago), may have been caused
by a large impact event. Attempts to test the idea by
dating impact craters on Earth are doomed because
there are too few of them. But the Moon has plenty
of craters formed during the past 600 million years
(the period for which we have a rich fossil record).
These could be dated and the reality of spikes in the
impact record could be tested.
How geologic processes operate. The Moon is a
natural laboratory for the study of some of the geologic processes that have shaped Earth. It is a great
place to study the details of how impact craters form
because there are so many well-preserved craters in
an enormous range of sizes. It is also one of the places
where volcanism has operated, but at lower gravity
than on either Earth or Mars.
LIFE AND WORK AT
A MOON BASE

People will someday return to the Moon. When
they do, it will be to stay. They will build a base on
the Moon, the first settlement in the beginning of an
interplanetary migration that will eventually take
them throughout the Solar System.
There will be lots to do at a lunar base. Geologists
will study the Moon with the intensity and vigor
they do on Earth, with emphasis on field studies.
Astronomers will make magnificent observations of
the universe. Solar scientists will study the solar
Early bombardment history of Earth and Moon. wind directly and investigate past activity trapped in
The thousands of craters on the Moon’s surface layers of regolith. Writers and artists will be inspired
chronicle the impact record of Earth. Most of the by a landscape so different from Earth’s. Life sciencraters formed before 3.9 billion years ago. Some tists will study how people adapt to a gravity field
scientists argue that the Moon suffered a cataclysmic one-sixth as strong as Earth’s, and figure out how to
bombardment (a drastic increase in the number of grow plants in lunar greenhouses. Engineers will
impacting projectiles) between 3.85 and 4.0 billion investigate how to keep a complex facility operating
years ago. If this happened and Earth was subjected continuously in a hostile environment. Mining and
to the blitzkrieg as well, then development of Earth’s chemical engineers will determine how to extract
earliest crust would have been affected. The intense resources from Moon rocks and regolith. The seembombardment could also have influenced the devel- ingly dry lunar surface contains plenty of the ingreopment of life, perhaps delaying its appearance.
dients to support life at a Moon base (oxygen and
Impacts, extinctions, and the evolution of life on hydrogen for water, nitrogen and carbon for the
Earth. The mechanisms of evolution and mass growth of plants), including the construction

14

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

The Curatorial Facility is one of the cleanest
places you’ll ever see. To
go inside, you must wear
white suits, boots, hats, and
gloves, outfits affectionately known as “bunny
suits.” Wipe a gloved hand
on a stainless steel cabinet
and you will not find a
trace of dust because the
air is filtered to remove
potential contaminating
particles.
The samples are stored
in a large vault, and only
one at a time is moved to a
glove box. You can pick
up the rocks by jamming
Geology at a Moon Base
your hands into a pair of
The best geology is done in the field. To understand rocks we must examine them up close, map their distributions, see the
the black rubber gloves,
structures in them, and chip off samples when necessary. The field geology done during the Apollo missions was hampered
allowing you to turn a rock
by the lack of time the astronauts could devote to it. But that will change when people live permanently on the Moon.
over, to sense its mass and
Geologists will be able to spend as much time as they need to decipher the story recorded by lunar rock formations. This
density, to connect with it.
painting shows three astronauts (one in the distance) examining the outside of a lava tube, an underground conduit that
A stereomicroscope alcarried red-hot lava to an eruption site perhaps hundreds of kilometers away.
lows you to look at it
closely. If you decide you
need a sample, and of course you have been approved
materials to build and maintain the base (regolith to obtain one, then expert lunar sample processors
can be molded into bricks; iron, titanium, and alumi- take over. The sample is photographed before and
num can be smelted and forged into tools and build- after the new sample is chipped off. This is time
ing materials). It will be an exciting, high-tech, consuming, but valuable to be sure we know the
faraway place inhabited by adventurous souls. [See relationships of all samples to each other. In many
the Unit 3 activities beginning on Page 99.]
cases, we can determine the orientation a specific
part of a rock was in on the surface of the Moon
WHERE MOON ROCKS
before collection.
HANG OUT
A select small number of pieces of the Moon are
on display in public museums, and only three pieces
Since arrival on Earth, lunar samples have been can actually be touched. These so-called lunar
treated with the respect they deserve. Most of the "touchstones" were all cut from the same Apollo 17
treasure of Apollo is stored at the Lunar Curatorial basaltic rock. One touchstone is housed at the
Facility at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Smithsonian Air and Space Museum in Washington,
A small percentage is stored in an auxiliary facility at D.C. Another touchstone is at the Space Center
Brooks Air Force Base near San Antonio, Texas, Houston facility adjacent to the Johnson Space Cenplaced there in case a disaster, such as a hurricane, ter. A third touchstone is on long-term loan to the
befalls Houston and the samples are destroyed. Many Museo de Las Ciencias at the Universidad Nacional
small samples are also in the laboratories of investi- Autonoma de Mexico. Visitors to these exhibits
gators around the world, where enthusiastic scien- marvel at the unique experience of touching a piece
tists keep trying to wring out the Moon’s secrets.
of the Moon with their bare hands.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

15

The Original Moon
Four and a half æons ago
a dark, dusty cloud deformed.
Sun became star; Earth became large,
and Moon, a new world, was born.
This Earth/Moon pair, once linked so close,
would later be forced apart.
Images of young intimate ties
we only perceive in part.
Both Earth and Moon were strongly stripped
of their mantle siderophiles.
But Moon alone was doomed to thirst
from depletion of volatiles.
Safe haven for precious rocks
NASA stores the lunar sample collection in a specially constructed facility called the Lunar Curatorial
Facility at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The priceless materials remain in a nitrogen
atmosphere, which is far less reactive chemically than normal oxygen-rich air. Scientists working in the
facility wear lint-free outfits affectionately known as “bunny suits,” and handle the samples in glove
boxes. In this photograph, Roberta Score is examining a piece of an Apollo 16 rock, while Andrea Mosie
(left) looks on.

Moon holds secrets of ages past
when planets dueled for space.
As primordial crust evolved
raw violence reworked Moon’s face.
After the first half billion years
huge permanent scars appeared;
ancient feldspathic crust survived
with a mafic mantle mirror.
But then there grew from half-lived depths
a new warmth set free inside.
Rivers and floods of partial melt
resurfaced the low ‘frontside’.

SCIENTISTS AS POETS
Scientists do not view the world in purely objective ways.
Each has biases and a unique way of looking at the world. Science
is not done solely with piles of data, hundreds of graphs, or pages
of equations. It is done with the heart and soul, too. Sometimes
a scientist is moved to write about it in elegant prose like that
written by Loren Eisley or in poetry, like the poem written by
Professor Carlé Pieters of Brown University. Dr. Pieters holds
her doctorate from MIT and is an expert in remote sensing of
planetary surfaces. She is especially well known for her telescopic observations of the Moon. The poem first appeared in the
frontispiece of Origin of the Moon, published by the Lunar and
Planetary Institute.

Thus evolved the Original Moon
in those turbulent times.
Now we paint from fragments of clues
the reasons and the rhymes:
Sister planet;
Modified clone;
Captured migrant;
Big splash disowned?
The Truth in some or all of these
will tickle, delight,
temper, and tease.

— Carlé Pieters

16

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

