Teacher Page

Impact Craters
Purpose
To determine the factors affecting the appearance of
impact craters and ejecta.

Background

[also see “Teacher's Guide” Pages 1, 2, photo on 8,
12, and photo on 13]

The circular features so obvious on the Moon’s surface are impact craters formed
when impactors smashed into the surface. The explosion and excavation of materials at
the impacted site created piles of rock (called ejecta) around the circular hole as well as
bright streaks of target material (called rays) thrown for great distances.
Two basic methods forming craters in nature are:
1) impact of a projectile on the surface and 2) collapse of the top of a volcano creating
a crater termed caldera. By studying all types of craters on Earth and by creating impact
craters in experimental laboratories geologists concluded that the Moon's craters are
impact in origin.
The factors affecting the appearance of impact craters and ejecta are the size and velocity
of the impactor, and the geology of the target surface.
By recording the number, size, and extent of erosion of craters, lunar geologists can
determine the ages of different surface units on the Moon and can piece together the
geologic history. This technique works because older surfaces are exposed to impacting
meteorites for a longer period of time than are younger surfaces.
Impact craters are not unique to the Moon. They are found on all the terrestrial planets
and on many moons of the outer planets.
On Earth, impact craters are not as easily recognized because of weathering and erosion.
Famous impact craters on Earth are Meteor Crater in Arizona, U.S.A.; Manicouagan in
Quebec, Canada; Sudbury in Ontario, Canada; Ries Crater in Germany, and Chicxulub on
the Yucatan coast in Mexico. Chicxulub is considered by most scientists as the source
crater of the catastrophe that led to the extinction of the dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous period. An interesting fact about the Chicxulub crater is that you cannot see it. Its
circular structure is nearly a kilometer below the surface and was originally identified
from magnetic and gravity data.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

61

Teacher Page

Impact Craters
Aristarchus

Typical characteristics of a lunar impact crater are labeled on this photograph of
Aristarchus, 42 km in diameter, located West of Mare Imbrium.

wall
floor
rays

ejecta

central
uplifts

raised
rim

raised rim - rock thrown out of the crater and deposited as a ring-shaped pile of debris at the crater’s
edge during the explosion and excavcation of an impact event.

floor

- bowl shaped or flat, characteristically below surrounding ground level unless filled in with lava.

central
uplifts

- mountains formed because of the huge increase and rapid decrease in pressure during the
impact event. They occur only in the center of craters that are larger than 40 km diameter.
See Tycho crater for another example.

walls

- characteristically steep and may have giant stairs called terraces.

ejecta

- blanket of material surrounding the crater that was excavated during the impact event. Ejecta
becomes thinner away from the crater.

rays

62

- bright streaks starting from a crater and extending away for great distances. See Copernicus
crater for another example.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Impact Craters
Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet.
In this activity, marbles or other spheres such as steel shot, ball bearings, golf, or wooden
balls are used as impactors dropped from a series of heights onto a prepared “lunar surface.” Using impactors of different mass dropped from the same height will allow students to study the relationship of mass of the impactor to crater size. Dropping impactors
from different heights will allow students to study the realtionship of velocity of the
impactor to crater size.

The following materials work well as a base for the “lunar surface” topped with a dusting of dry tempera paint or other material in a contrasting color:
all purpose flour

- Reusable in this activity and keeps well in a covered container.

baking soda

- It can be recycled for use in the lava layer activity or for many
other science activities. Reusable in this activity, even if colored, by adding a clean layer of new white baking soda on
top. Keeps indefinitely in a covered container. Baking soda
mixed (1:1) with table salt also works.

corn meal

- Reusable in this activity but probably not recyclable. Keeps
only in freezer in airtight container.

sand and
corn starch

- Mixed (1:1), sand must be very dry. Keeps only in freezer in
airtight container.

dry tempera paint
or powdered drink
mixes or glitter

- Sift on top; use a sieve, screen, or flour sifter. A contrasting
color to the base materials gives striking results.

Pans should be plastic, aluminum, or cardboard. Do not use glass. They should be at
least 7.5 cm deep. Basic 10"x12" aluminum pans or plastic tubs work fine, but the
larger the better to avoid misses. Also, a larger pan may allow students to drop more
marbles before having to resurface the target materials.
A reproducible student “Data Chart” is included; students will need a separate chart for
each impactor used in the activity.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

63

Teacher Page

Impact Craters

In Class
1. Begin by looking at craters in photographs of the Moon and asking students their
ideas of how craters formed.
2. During this activity, the flour, baking soda, or dry paint may fall onto the floor and
the baking soda may even be disbursed into the air. Spread newspapers under the
pan(s) to catch spills or consider doing the activity outside. Under supervision,
students have successfully dropped marbles from second-story balconies. Resurface
the pan before a high drop.
3. Have the students agree beforehand on the method they will use to “smooth” and
resurface the material in the pan between impacts. The material need not be packed
down. Shaking or tilting the pan back and forth produces a smooth surface. Then
be sure to reapply a fresh dusting of dry tempera paint or other material. Remind
students that better experimental control is achieved with consistent handling of the
materials. For instance, cratering results may vary if the material is packed down for
some trials and not for others.
4. Allow some practice time for dropping marbles and resurfacing the materials in the
pan before actually recording data.
5. Because of the low velocity of the marbles compared with the velocity of real
impactors, the experimental impact craters may not have raised rims. Central uplifts
and terraced walls will be absent.
6. The higher the drop height, the greater the velocity of the marble, so a larger crater
will be made and the ejecta will spread out farther.
7. If the impactor were dropped from 6 meters, then the crater would be larger. The
students need to extrapolate the graph out far enough to read the predicted crater
diameter.

Wrap-Up
Have the class compare and contrast their hypotheses on what things affect the appearance of craters and ejecta.

64

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Impact Craters
Extensions
1. As a grand finale for your students, demonstrate a more forceful impact using a
slingshot.
2. What would happen if you change the angle of impact? How could this be tested?
Try it! Do the results support your hypothesis?
If the angle of impact is changed, then the rays will be concentrated and longer in
the direction of impact. A more horizontal impact angle produces a more skewed
crater shape.
3. To focus attention on the rays produced during an impact, place a paper bulls-eye
target with a central hole on top of a large, flour-filled pan. Students drop a marble
through the hole to measure ray lengths and orientations.
4. Use plaster of Paris or wet sand instead of dry materials.
5. Videotape the activity.
6. Some people think the extinction of the dinosaurs was caused by massive global
climate changes because of a meteorite impact on Earth. Summarize the exciting
work that has been done at Chicxulub on the Yucatan coast of Mexico.
7. Some people think Earth was hit by an object the size of Mars that caused a large
part of Earth to “splash” into space, forming the Moon. Do you agree or disagree?
Explain your answer.
8. Physics students could calculate the velocities of the impactors from various heights.
(Answers from heights of 30 cm, 60 cm, 90 cm, and 2 m should, of course, agree with
the velocity values shown on the “Impact Craters - Data Chart”.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

65

Name:

impactor #

Date:

gm

Impact Craters - Data Chart
trial 1

trial 2

trial 3

total

average

crater
diameter
crater
depth
average
length of
all rays
crater
diameter
crater
depth
average
length of
all rays
crater
diameter
crater
depth
average
length of
all rays
crater
diameter
crater
depth
average
length of
all rays

66

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Impact Craters
Purpose
To determine the factors affecting the appearance of
impact craters and ejecta.

Key Words

Procedure

impact

Making an hypothesis

impactor
ejecta

1. After looking at photographs of the Moon, how do
you think the craters were formed?

Materials
1 pan
“lunar” surface material
tempera paint, dry
sieve or sifter
balance

2. What do you think are factors that affect the
appearance and size of craters and ejecta?

3 impactors (marbles or
other spheres)
meter stick
ruler, plastic with middle
depression
protractor
“Data Chart” for each
impactor
graph paper

Preparing a “lunar” test surface
1. Fill a pan with surface material to a depth of
about 2.5 cm. Smooth the surface, then tap the
pan to make the materials settle evenly.
2. Sprinkle a fine layer of dry tempera paint
evenly and completely over the surface. Use a
sieve or sifter for more uniform layering.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

67

Impact Craters
3. What does this “lunar” surface look like before testing?

Cratering Process
1. Use the balance to measure the mass of each impactor. Record
the mass on the “Data Chart” for this impactor.
2. Drop impactor #1 from a height of 30 cm onto the prepared surface.
3. Measure the diameter and depth of the resulting crater.
4. Note the presence of ejecta (rays). Count the rays, measure, and
determine the average length of all the rays.
5. Record measurements and any other observations you have about
the appearance of the crater on the Data Chart.
Make three trials and compute the average values.
6. Repeat steps 2 through 5 for impactor #1, increasing the drop
heights to 60 cm, 90 cm, and 2 meters. Complete the Data Chart
for this impactor. Note that the higher the drop height, the faster
the impactor hits the surface.
7. Now repeat steps 1 through 6 for two more impactors. Use a
separate Data Chart for each impactor.
8. Graph your results.
Graph #1: Average crater diameter vs. impactor height or velocity.
Graph #2: Average ejecta (ray) length vs. impactor height or
velocity.
Note: on the graphs, use different symbols (e.g., dot, triangle,
plus, etc.) for different impactors.

68

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Impact Craters
Results
1. Is your hypothesis about what affects the appearance and size of
craters supported by test data? Explain why or why not.

2. What do the data reveal about the relationship between crater
size and velocity of impactor?

3. What do the data reveal about the relationship between ejecta
(ray) length and velocity of impactor?

4. If the impactor were dropped from 6 meters, would the crater be
larger or smaller? How much larger or smaller?
(Note: the velocity of the impactor would be 1,084 cm/s.)
Explain your answer.

5. Based on the experimental data, describe the appearance of an
impact crater.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

69

Impact Craters
6. The size of a crater made during an impact depends not only on
the mass and velocity of the impactor, but also on the amount
of kinetic energy possessed by the impacting object. Kinetic
energy, energy in motion, is described as:
KE = 1/2(mv2)
where, m = mass and v = velocity.
During impact, the kinetic energy of an asteroid is transferred
to the target surface, breaking up rock and moving the particles
around.
7. How does the kinetic energy of an impacting object relate to
crater diameter?

8. Looking at the results in your Data Tables, which is the most
imporant factor controlling the kinetic energy of a projectile, its
diameter, its mass, or its velocity?

9. Does this make sense? How do your results compare to the
kinetic energy equation?

10. Try plotting crater diameter vs. kinetic energy as Graph #3.
The product of mass (in gm) and velocity (in cm/s) squared is a
new unit called “erg.”

70

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

