Education Product
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration

Teachers

Grades 4–12

a Teacher’s Guide
with activities
for Earth
and Space
Sciences

a Teacher’s Guide
with activities
for Earth
and Space
Sciences

National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Office of Human Resources and Education
Education Division
Office of Space Science
Solar System Exploration Division

This Publication is in the Public Domain and is not copyrighted.
Permission is not required for duplication.
November 1997

EG-1997-10-116-HQ

my notes
G. Jeffrey Taylor
Project Coordinator
Professor
Hawai'i Institute of Geophysics and Planetology
School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology
University of Hawai'i at Manoa

Linda M.V. Martel

The following people contributed
the activities in this book.
Kathy Chock
Hawai'i Department of Education

Pauline Higa
Mililani High School

Managing Editor

Art Kimura

Hawai'i Institute of Geophysics and Planetology
School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology
University of Hawai'i at Manoa

Future Flight Hawai'i

Brooks G. Bays, Jr.

Forrest Luke
Leilehua High School

Designer

Linda Martel

Publication Services
School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology
University of Hawai'i at Manoa

University of Hawai'i

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The activities were tested by teachers in classrooms
throughout the state of Hawai'i. We thank many
individuals in the Oklahoma State University Aerospace Education Services Program and at NASA
Headquarters for their useful reviews of the materials. We especially thank Pam Bacon and Greg Vogt
for all their help and encouragement. We also thank
the Challenger Center for allowing a modification of
the Marsville activity on life support systems for
use in this book. Second edition revisions were
supported by the Hawai'i Space Grant Consortium.

Dale Olive
Waiakea High School

Kevin Polk
University of Hawai'i

Randolph Scoville
Highlands Intermediate School

Liza Shigeta Kobayashi
Waiakea High School

Cheryl Shintani
Koloa Elementary School

Nancy Tashima
About the cover
Our knowledge and concepts of the Moon change
over time as depicted by the three images.
A map of the Moon (circa 1700s) is overlaid by
an Apollo 11 astronaut footprint (NASA photo
AS11-40-5878) and a NASA painting of a future
lunar habitation module by Pat Rawlings of
Science Applications International Corporation.

Astronaut Ellison S. Onizuka Space Center

Jeff Taylor
University of Hawai'i

Arlene Yoshimura
Mililani Mauka Elementary School

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

i

Table of Contents
About This Book
About the Lunar Sample Disk
About the Slide Set
Activity Matrices

iii
iv
v
vi

Teacher's Guide -- The Moon: Gateway to the Solar System
Moon ABCs Fact Sheet
Rock ABCs Fact Sheet
Progress in Lunar Science Chart
Nearside of the Moon--Apollo Landing Sites

1
17
19
20
21

Unit 1 Pre-Apollo
Resource Section for Unit 1
Distance to the Moon
Diameter of the Moon
Reaping Rocks

23
24
25
29
33

Unit 2 Learning From Apollo
Resource Section for Unit 2
The Lunar Disk
Apollo Landing Sites
Regolith Formation
Lunar Surface
Differentiation
Impact Craters
Clay Lava Flows
Lava Layering
Lunar Landing Sites
Lunar Roving Vehicle
Moon Anomalies

37
38
39
43
47
53
57
61
71
77
83
87
91

Unit 3 The Future
Resource Section for Unit 3
Lunar Land Use
Life Support Systems
Lunar Biospheres

99
100
101
109
129

Glossary
Resources for Educators

141
145

ii

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

About this Book
These materials have been designed for use
in upper elementary through high schools
especially, but not exclusively, with the
Lunar Sample Disk. See Page iv.
This book contains:
• information on the Lunar Sample Disk,
• Activity Matrices -- Skills & Standards,
• a Teacher’s Guide,
• Moon ABCs Fact Sheet,
• Rock ABCs Fact Sheet,
• Progress in Lunar Science Chart,
• 17 activities,
• Resource Section for each unit,
• Glossary,
• NASA Educational Resources.
The “Teacher’s Guide” titled “The Moon:
Gateway to the Solar System,” pages 1-16,
provides background information about the
Moon. It tells the story of the Moon’s geological history and how scientists try to decipher the story. This background information
may be useful reading for students as well.
Key facts about the Moon appear on the
“Moon ABCs” and “Rock ABCs” pages.
These pages were named to emphasize
the basic nature of the information. The
“Progress in Lunar Science Chart” summarizes our knowledge about the Moon from
1959 to 1997.
The activities are divided into three units:
Pre-Apollo, Learning from Apollo, and the
Future. These correspond, at least roughly,
to exercises that can be done before the
Lunar Sample Disk arrives at your school
(Pre-Apollo), while it is there (Learning
from Apollo), and after it has been returned
to NASA (The Future).

The length of time needed to complete an
activity will vary according to the degree of
difficulty and the development level of the
students. Thus activities may take one to
eight or more class periods.
“Activity Matrices” are provided to assist
in identifying the science process skills and
science and mathematics educational standards associated with each activity.
Classroom activities promote problemsolving, communication skills, and teamwork. Each activity consists of teacher
pages and reproducible student sheets.
Teacher pages begin with a statement of
purpose and background information with
answers specific to the activity. Relevant
pages in the “Teacher's Guide” also are
listed. These are followed by sections on
preparation, in-class suggestions, wrap-up
ideas, and extensions. Words that are bolded
appear in the Glossary.
Student sheets include a purpose statement, key words, list of materials, procedure,
questions with space provided for answers,
and charts. Key words are included in the
Glossary. Materials for each activity are
listed in order of use. They are bolded in the
text of the procedure section as a memory
aid for students.
A note on measurements: These activities
use metric units of measure with the few
exceptions when English units are used to
describe items from the material lists such
as pans or measuring cups.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

iii

About the
Lunar Sample Disk
Legacy of Apollo

How to Schedule a Disk

The collection of rocks and regolith from
the Moon is a tangible legacy of the U.S.
Apollo Space Program. NASA makes a
small portion of this “extraterrestrial”
material available for classroom use
through the Lunar Sample Loan Program.

Educators must first be certified to borrow lunar material by attending a training
seminar on security requirements and
proper handling procedures. This is the
same certification as for borrowing the
Meteorite Sample Disk. Then a written request must be sent to a NASA Educator
Resource Center at least one month prior to
the requested loan date. Contact the NASA
Educator Resource Center that serves your
geographic area for more information on
certification seminars and request procedures (refer to Page 146 of this book for
addresses and phone numbers.)

Lunar Sample Loan
Program
Six samples of rocks and regolith are
embedded in a 15-cm diameter plastic disk.
Disks are sent via registered mail to educators
for one- to two-week loan periods. The
package also includes this book Exploring
the Moon, an annotated slide set of lunar
images (described more fully on Page v), and
a collection of color photographs and descriptions of the six samples.

Ninth grade science students from Waipahu High School, Hawai'i view the
Lunar Sample Disk as part of an activity from Exploring the Moon .
iv

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

About the Slide Set
The Collection

How to Obtain a Copy

A set of thirty-six 35-mm slides has been
assembled to complement the activities in
this book Exploring the Moon. Each slide
is accompanied by detailed captions. Topics
include what we knew about the Moon from
telescopic and other astronomic observations before Apollo, Apollo missions, astronaut activities on the lunar surface, the Highlands, the Maria, how the Moon formed, and
exciting ideas for future explorations.

It is easy to obtain a copy of the slides. They
are available from the Central Operation of
Resources for Educators (CORE) in Ohio or
from NASA Educator Resource Centers.
Phone calls are welcome if you are unable
to visit the Educator Resource Center that
serves your geographic area. Please refer to
Page 146 in this book for addresses and
phone numbers for CORE and Educator
Resource Centers.

ple

lt

sa

ba

m
sa

rake samples

Apollo 15 site

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

v

Activity Matrix
Science Process Skills

Unit 1
PreApollo
Unit 2

Distance to the Moon
Diameter of the Moon
Reaping Rocks
The Lunar Disk

Apollo Landing Sites
Learning
From
Regolith Formation
Apollo
Lunar Surface
Differentiation
Impact Craters
Clay Lava Flows
Lava Layering
Lunar Landing Sites
Lunar Roving Vehicle
Moon Anomalies
Unit 3
Future

Lunar Land Use
Life Support Systems
Lunar Biosphere

vi

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Activity Matrix
Science Standards

Unit 1
PreApollo
Unit 2

Distance to the Moon
Diameter of the Moon
Reaping Rocks
The Lunar Disk
Apollo Landing Sites

Learning
From
Regolith Formation
Apollo
Lunar Surface
Differentiation
Impact Craters
Clay Lava Flows
Lava Layering

Lunar Landing Sites
Lunar Roving Vehicle
Moon Anomalies

Unit 3
Future

Lunar Land Use
Life Support Systems
Lunar Biosphere

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

vii

Activity Matrix
Mathematics Standards

Unit 1
PreApollo
Unit 2

Distance to the Moon
Diameter of the Moon
Reaping Rocks
The Lunar Disk

Apollo Landing Sites
Learning
From
Regolith Formation
Apollo
Lunar Surface
Differentiation
Impact Craters
Clay Lava Flows
Lava Layering
Lunar Landing Sites
Lunar Roving Vehicle
Moon Anomalies
Unit 3
Future

Lunar Land Use
Life Support Systems
Lunar Biosphere

viii

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher’s Guide
THE MOON
GATEWAY TO THE SOLAR SYSTEM
G. Jeffrey Taylor, PhD

WHEN ASTRONAUTS dug into the
Moon’s surface during the Apollo program,
they were doing more than digging up dry, dark
sediment. They were time travelers. The rocks
and sediment returned by Apollo contain vital
clues to how Earth and the Moon formed, the
nature and timing of early melting, the intensity
of impact bombardment and its variation with
time, and even the history of the Sun. Most of
this information, crucial parts of the story of
planet Earth, cannot be learned by studying
rocks on Earth because our planet is so geologically active that it has erased much of the
record. The clues have been lost in billions of
years of mountain building, volcanism, weathering, and erosion. Colliding tectonic plates
The Moon, front and back
The top right photograph is a telescopic image of the Earth-facing half
of the Moon obtained at Lick Observatory in California. The one below
right was taken during the Apollo 16 mission and shows mostly the farside,
except for the dark areas on the left, which can be seen, though barely,
from Earth. The two major types of terrain are clearly visible. Thehighlands,
which are especially well displayed in the photograph of the farside, are
light-colored and heavily cratered. The maria are darker and smoother;
they formed when lava flows filled depressions. One of the mysteries about
the Moon is why fewer maria occur on the farside than nearside. Note
how many craters stand shoulder to shoulder on the farside. These
immense holes chronicle the Moon’s early bombardment, an intense
barrage that probably affected the early Earth as well.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

1

and falling rain have erased much of Earth history,
especially the early years before four billion years ago.
The Moon was geologically active in its heyday,
producing a fascinating array of products, but its
geologic engine was not vigorous and all records of
early events were not lost. Its secrets are recorded in
its craters, plains, and rocks. This guide reveals the
secrets that lunar scientists have uncovered since the
Apollo missions returned 382 kilograms (843 pounds)
of rock and sediment from the lovely body that
graces the night sky.
The emphasis here is on geology. The samples
returned by Apollo are the stars of the show. [See the
“Lunar Disk” activity on Pages 39–42 and the
“Apollo Landing Sites” activity on Pages 43–46.]
Understanding the Moon, however, requires other
geological approaches, such as geological mapping
from high-quality photographs, the study of analogous features on Earth (for instance, impact craters),
and experiments in laboratories.
THE LUNAR LANDSCAPE
The Moon is not like Earth. It does not have oceans,
lakes, rivers, or streams. It does not have wind-blown
ice fields at its poles. Roses and morning glories do not
sprout from its charcoal gray, dusty surface. Redwoods do not tower above its cratered ground. Dinosaur foot prints cannot be found. Paramecium never
conjugated, amoeba never split, and dogs never
barked. The wind never blew. People never lived
there—but they have wondered about it for centuries, and a few lucky ones have even visited it.
Highlands and lowlands
The major features of the Moon’s surface can be
seen by just looking up at it. It has lighter and darker
areas. These distinctive terrains are the bright lunar
highlands (also known as the lunar terrae, which is
Latin for “land”) and the darker plains called the
lunar maria, Latin for “seas,” which they resembled
to Thomas Hariot and Galileo Galilei, the first scientists to examine the Moon with telescopes. The
names terrae and maria were given to lunar terrains
by Hariot and Galileo’s contemporary, Johannes
Kepler. In fact, the idea that the highlands and maria
correspond to lands and seas appears to have been
popular among ancient Greeks long before tele-

2

scopes were invented. Although we now know they
are not seas (the Moon never had any water), we still
use the term maria, and its singular form, mare.
The highlands and craters
Closer inspection shows that the highlands comprise countless overlapping craters, ranging in size
from the smallest visible in photographs (1 meter on
the best Apollo photographs) to more than 1000 km.
Essentially all of these craters formed when meteorites crashed into the Moon. Before either robotic or
piloted spacecraft went to the Moon, many scientists
thought that most lunar craters were volcanic in
origin. But as we found out more about the nature of
lunar craters and studied impact craters on Earth, it
became clear that the Moon has been bombarded by
cosmic projectiles. The samples returned by the
Apollo missions confirmed the pervasive role impact
processes play in shaping the lunar landscape.
The term “meteorite impact” is used to describe
the process of surface bombardment by cosmic object. The objects themselves are variously referred to
as “impactors” or “projectiles.”
The impact process is explosive. A large impactor does not simply bore its way into a planet’s
surface. When it hits, it is moving extremely fast,
more than 20 km/sec (70,000 km/hour). This meeting is not tender. High-pressure waves are sent back
into the impactor and into the target planet. The
impactor is so overwhelmed by the passage of the
shock wave that almost all of it vaporizes, never to be
seen again. The target material is compressed strongly,
then decompressed. A little is vaporized, some melted,
but most (a mass of about 10,000 times the mass of
the impactor) is tossed out of the target area, piling up
around the hole so produced. The bottom of the crater
is lower than the original ground surface, the piled up
material on the rim is higher. This is the characteristic
shape of an impact crater and is different from
volcanic calderas (no piled up materials) or cinder
cones (the central pit is above the original ground
surface). A small amount of the target is also tossed
great distances along arcuate paths called rays.
Real impacts cannot be readily simulated in a
classroom. In fact, there are very few facilities where
we can simulate high-velocity impacts. Nevertheless,
classroom experiments using marbles, ball bearings,
or other objects can still illustrate many important

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

points about the impact process. For example, objects impacting at a variety of
velocities (hence kinetic energies) produce
craters with a variety of sizes; the more
energy, the larger the crater. [See the “Impact Craters” activity on Pages 61–70.]
The maria
The maria cover 16% of the lunar surface and are composed of lava flows that
filled relatively low places, mostly inside
immense impact basins. So, although the
Moon does not have many volcanic craters, it did experience volcanic activity.
Close examination of the relationships between the highlands and the maria shows
that this activity took place after the highlands formed and after most of the cratering
took place. Thus, the maria are younger than
the highlands. [See the “Clay Lava Flows”
activity on Pages 71–76 and the “Lava Layering” activity on Pages 77–82.]
How do we know that the dark plains
are covered with lava flows? Why not some
other kind of rock? Even before the Apollo
missions brought back samples from the
maria, there were strong suspicions that the
plains were volcanic. They contain some
features that look very much like lava flows.
Other features resemble lava channels, Rivers or lava channels?
which form in some types of lava flows on The origin of river-like valleys, called rilles, was debated before the Apollo 15 mission visited one of
Earth. Still other features resemble col- them, Hadley Rille, shown here from orbit (white arrow shows the landing site) and from the lunar
lapses along underground volcanic fea- surface. Some scientists argued that rilles were river valleys, implying that the Moon had flowing
tures called lava tubes. These and other water at one time. Others thought that rilles resembled the channels that form in lava flows.
features convinced most lunar scientists Observations by the Apollo 15 crew and samples returned settled the argument: rilles are volcanic
before the Apollo missions that the maria features.
were lava plains. This insight was confirmed by samples collected from the maria: they logic mapping using high-quality telescopic images,
are a type of volcanic rock called basalt.
showed that the mare must be considerably younger
The maria fill many of the gigantic impact basins than the basins in which they reside. For example, the
that decorate the Moon’s nearside. (The Moon keeps impact that formed the large Imbrium basin (the
the same hemisphere towards Earth because Earth’s Man-in-the-Moon’s right eye) hurled material outgravity has locked in the Moon’s rotation.) Some wards and sculpted the mountains surrounding the
scientists contended during the 1960s that this dem- Serenitatis basin (the left eye); thus, Serenitatis must
onstrated a cause and effect: impact caused not only be older. The Serenitatis basin is also home to Mare
the formation of a large crater but led to melting of the Serenitatis. If the lavas in Mare Serentatis formed
lunar interior as well. Thus, it was argued, the im- when the basin did, they ought to show the effects of
pacts triggered the volcanism. However, careful geo- the giant impact that formed Imbrium. They show no
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

3

Maria mysteries
Some mysteries persist about the maria. For one,
why are volcanoes missing except for the cinder
cones associated with dark mantle deposits? Second, if no obvious volcanoes exist, where did the
lavas erupt from? In some cases, we can see that lava
emerged from the margins of enormous impact basins, perhaps along cracks concentric to the basin.
But in most cases, we cannot see the places where the
lava erupted. Another curious feature is that almost
all the maria occur on the Earth-facing side of the
Moon. Most scientists guess that this asymmetry is
caused by the highlands crust being thicker on the
lunar farside, making it difficult for basalts to make
it all the way through to the surface. [See the “Moon
Anomalies” activity on Pages 91–98.]

Lava flows dribbling across Mare Imbrium
Long lava flows (lower left to upper right through center of photo) in Mare Imbrium.
The flows are up to 400 kilometers long (the entire extent is not shown in this Apollo

THE DUSTY LUNAR SURFACE

photograph) and have 30-meter high cliffs at their margins. The ridges running roughly
perpendicular to the flows are called wrinkle ridges. The ridges formed after the
flows because they did not impede the advance of the lava flow. The smooth plains
surrounding the prominent lava flows are also lava, but older, so the margins are
harder to see. The craters on the right along the ridge are about 5 kilometers in
diameter.

signs of it. Furthermore, the maria contain far fewer
craters than do basin deposits, hence have been
around a shorter time (the older the surface, the
greater the number of craters). The Apollo samples,
of course, confirmed these astute geological observations and showed that the maria filling some basins
formed a billion years after the basin formed.
One other type of deposit associated with the
maria, though it blankets highlands areas as well, is
known as dark mantle deposits. They cannot be seen
except with telescopes or from spacecraft near the
Moon, but are important nonetheless. Before Apollo,
most scientists believed that the dark mantle deposits
were formed by explosive volcanic eruptions known
as pyroclastic eruptions (literally, “pieces of fire”).
Some deposits seemed to be associated with low,
broad, dark cinder cones, consistent with the idea that
they were formed by pyroclastic eruptions—this is
how cinder cones form on Earth. This bit of geologic
deduction was proven by the Apollo 17 mission and
its sampling of the “orange soil,” a collection of tiny
glass droplets like those found in terrestrial pyroclastic eruptions.

4

Some visitors to Kilauea Volcano, Hawai‘i, have
been overheard to say, upon seeing a vast landscape
covered with fresh lava, “It looks just like the Moon.”
Well, it doesn’t. The fresh lava flows of Kilauea and
other active volcanoes are usually dark grayish and
barren like the Moon, but the resemblance ends
there. The lunar surface is charcoal gray and sandy,
with a sizable supply of fine sediment. Meteorite
impacts over billions of years have ground up the
formerly fresh surfaces into powder. Because the
Moon has virtually no atmosphere, even the tiniest
meteorite strikes a defenseless surface at its full
cosmic velocity, at least 20 km/sec. Some rocks lie
strewn about the surface, resembling boulders sticking up through fresh snow on the slopes of Aspen or
Vail. Even these boulders won’t last long, maybe a
few hundred million years, before they are ground up
into powder by the relentless rain of high-speed
projectiles. Of course, an occasional larger impactor
arrives, say the size of a car, and excavates fresh rock
from beneath the blanket of powdery sediment. The
meteoritic rain then begins to grind the fresh boulders
down, slowly but inevitably.
The powdery blanket that covers the Moon is
called the lunar regolith, a term for mechanically
produced debris layers on planetary surfaces. Many
scientists also call it the “lunar soil,” but it contains
none of the organic matter that occurs in soils on
Earth. Some people use the term “sediment” for

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

regolith. Be forewarned that the regolith
samples in the Lunar Sample Disk are
labeled “soil.” Although it is everywhere,
the regolith is thin, ranging from about
two meters on the youngest maria to
perhaps 20 meters in the oldest surfaces
in the highlands. [See the “Regolith Formation” activity on Pages 47–52.]
Lunar regolith is a mixed blessing.
On the one hand, it has mixed local
material so that a shovelful contains most
of the rock types that occur in an area. It
even contains some rock fragments tossed
in by impacts in remote regions. Thus,
the regolith is a great rock collection. It
also contains the record of impacts during the past several hundred million to
a billion years, crucial information for
understanding the rate of impact on
Earth during that time. On the other
hand, this impact record is not written
very clearly and we have not come close
to figuring it out as yet. The blanket of
regolith also greatly obscures the details
of the bedrock geology. This made field
work during Apollo difficult and hinders
our understanding of lunar history.
The regolith consists of what you’d
expect from an impact-generated pile
of debris. It contains rock and mineral
fragments derived from the original bedrock. It also contains glassy particles
formed by the impacts. In many lunar
regoliths, half of the particles are composed of mineral fragments that are bound
together by impact glass; scientists call
these objects agglutinates. The chemical composition of the regolith reflects
the composition of the bedrock underneath. Regolith in the highlands is rich
in aluminum, as are highland rocks.
Regolith in the maria is rich in iron and
magnesium, major constituents of basalt. A little bit of mixing from beneath
basalt layers or from distant highland
locales occurs, but not enough to obscure the basic difference between the
highlands and the maria.

Raking moon dirt
One of the most useful ways of obtaining samples of Moon rocks was to drag a rake through the
regolith. This allowed rock fragments larger than about one centimeter to remain on tines of the rake,
while smaller fragments fell through. Note the large range in the sizes of rock fragments. One large
boulder lies near the rake, a medium-sized one is visible between the astronaut’s feet, along with
countless other pebbles. Most of the regolith is smaller than fine sand. The astronaut’s footprints are
distinct because the regolith is composed of a large percentage of tiny particles (about 20% is smaller
than 0.02 millimeters).

A geologist-astronaut does field work on the Moon
Geologist Harrison H. Schmitt examines a large rock at the Apollo 17 landing site. This large boulder
contains numerous rock fragments that were smashed together by the huge impact event that made
the 750-kilometer Serentatis basin on the Moon.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

5

One of the great potential bits of information
stored in the complex pile atop the lunar surface is the
history of the Sun. The nearest star puts out prodigious amounts of particles called the solar wind.
Composed mostly of hydrogen, helium, neon, carbon, and nitrogen, the solar wind particles strike the
lunar surface and are implanted into mineral grains.
The amounts build up with time. In principle, we can
determine if conditions inside the Sun have changed
over time by analyzing these solar wind products,
especially the isotopic composition of them.
The same solar wind gases may prove useful
when people establish permanent settlements on the
Moon. Life support systems require the life-giving
elements: hydrogen and oxygen (for water), carbon,
and nitrogen. Plenty of oxygen is bound in the
silicate, minerals of lunar rocks (about 50% by volume) and the solar wind provided the rest. So, when
the astronauts were digging up lunar regolith for
return to Earth, they were not merely sampling—
they were prospecting!

MOON ROCKS
Geologists learn an amazing amount about a
planet by examining photographs and using other
types of remotely sensed data, but eventually they
need to collect some samples. For example, although
geologists determined unambigously from photographs that the maria are younger than the highlands,
they did not know their absolute age, the age in years.
Rocks also provide key tests to hypotheses. For
instance, the maria were thought to be covered with
lava flows, but we did not know for sure until we
collected samples from them. Also, no method can
accurately determine the chemical and mineralogical composition of a rock except laboratory analysis.
Most important, samples provide surprises, telling
us things we never expected. The highlands provide
the best example of a geological surprise, and one
with great consequences for our understanding of
what Earth was like 4.5 billion years ago.

A fist-sized piece of the original lunar crust
This rock sample was collected during the Apollo 15 mission. It is an anorthosite, a

Smash and mix, mix and melt

rock composed of little else but the mineral feldspar. Anorthosites formed from the

This rock returned by the Apollo 16 mission attests to the effects of impacts on a

enormous magma system, the lunar magma ocean, that surrounded the newly

planet’s crust. It is a hodgepodge of rock and mineral fragments, some of which

formed Moon. Because of its importance in understanding the origin of the Moon’s

themselves are complicated mishmashes of rock debris. Geologists call these

crust, the rock was nicknamed the “genesis rock.”

complicated rocks breccias.

6

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Highland rocks, the lunar magma
ocean, and maybe a cataclysm

Hawai'i developed a method to determine the iron
content of the lunar surface from ratioes of the
intensity of light reflected in different wavelengths.
Strange as it may seem, the first highland rocks The magma ocean hypothesis predicts that the lunar
were collected during the first lunar landing, the highlands should have low iron contents, less than
Apollo 11 mission, which landed on a mare, Mare about 5 wt. % (when recorded as iron oxide, FeO).
Tranquillitatis. Although most of the rocks collected According to Clementine measurements, the highwere, indeed, basalts, some millimeter-sized rock lands average slightly under 5 wt. % FeO, consistent
fragments were quite different. They were composed with the magma ocean idea. Further refinement of
chiefly of the mineral plagioclase feldspar; some this test is underway using data from Clementine and
fragments were composed of nothing but plagio- the forthcoming U. S. Lunar Prospector Mission,
clase. [See the “Rock ABCs Fact Sheet” on Page 19.] scheduled for launch in early 1998.
Such rocks are called anorthosites. Some scientists
The highlands also contain other types of igneous
suggested that these fragments were blasted to the rocks. The most abundant are called norites and
Apollo 11 landing site by distant impacts on highland troctolites, rocks composed of equal amounts of
terrain. Thus, they argued, the highlands are loaded plagioclase and either olivine or pyroxene (both
with plagioclase. This was a bold extrapolation con- silicate minerals containing iron and magnesium).
firmed by subsequent Apollo missions to highland Age dating suggests that these rocks are slightly
sites.
younger than the anorthosites and formed after the
But this was not enough for some scientists. If magma ocean had crystallized.
the highlands are enriched in plagioclase, how did
Highland rocks are difficult to work with because
they get that way? One way is to accumulate it by all that cratering, so evident in photographs of the
flotation in a magma (molten rock). This happens highlands, has taken its toll on the rocks. Most
in thick subterranean magma bodies on Earth. highland rocks are complex mixtures of other rocks.
So, plagioclase floated in a magma. But if ALL the The original igneous rocks have been melted, mixed,
lunar highlands are enriched in
plagioclase, then the magma must
have been all over the Moon. The
early Moon must have been covered by a global ocean of magma,
now commonly referred to as the
lunar magma ocean. Although
some scientists still remain
unconvinced about the veracity
of the magma ocean hypothesis,
nothing we have learned since has contradicted the smashed, and generally abused by impacts during the
idea that 4.5 billion years ago the Moon was covered Moon’s first half billion years. We call these compliby a layer of magma hundreds of kilometers thick. cated rocks breccias. Some are so mixed up that they
The idea has been extended to the young Earth as contain breccias within breccias within breccias.
well, and even to Mars and some asteroids. And all Most of the anorthosites, norites, and troctolites are
this sprung forth because creative and bold scientists actually rock fragments inside breccias. Separating
saw special importance in a few dozen white frag- them out is painstaking work.
ments of anorthosite strewn about in a pile of charAn interesting thing about highland breccias,
coal gray lunar regolith.
especially those we call impact melt breccias (rocks
The magma ocean concept was tested by the partly melted by an impact event), is that most of
1994 U. S. Clementine Mission to the Moon. them fall into a relatively narrow span of ages, from
Clementine was in a pole-to-pole orbit for two months, about 3.85 to 4.0 billion years. This has led some
during which it took thousands of photographs in scientists to propose (boldly again–lunar scientists
several wavelengths. Scientists at the University of don’t seem to be timid!) that the Moon was
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

7

bombarded with exceptional intensity during that
narrow time interval. If it happened, it probably
affected Earth as well, perhaps leading to production
of the first sedimentary basins, and possibly inhibiting the formation of the first life on this planet or
harming whatever life had developed by four billion
years ago. This idea of a cataclysmic bombardment
of the Moon is not yet proven. It could be that the
apparent clustering in rock ages reflects poor sampling—we may only have obtained samples from
one or two large impact basins. The idea can be tested
by obtaining samples from many more localities on
the Moon.

potassium (chemical symbol K), rare-earth elements
(abbreviated REE), and phosphorus (P). Most Moon
specialists believe that KREEP represents the last
dregs from the crystallization of the magma ocean.
Huge impacts dug down to the lower crust of the
Moon and excavated it, mixing it with other debris
to form KREEPy breccias.
The maria:
lava flows and fountains of fire
The missions to mare areas brought back lots of
samples of basalt. Basalts differ from the highlands
rocks in having more olivine and pyroxene, and less

A piece of a lava flow
This typical sample of a mare basalt is composed mostly of brown pyroxene (grayish
in the photo) and white feldspar. The holes in the sample are frozen gas bubbles.
Some basalt samples have many such bubbles (called vesicles by geologists),
whereas others have none.

Multi-ringed masterpieces
The Moon has about 35 multi-ringed, circular impact features larger than 300 km in
diameter. The one shown here, the Orientale basin, has three very prominent rings.
The diameter of the outer one is 930 km. These immense craters might all have
formed in a narrow time interval between 3.85 and 4.0 billion years ago. Scientists
do not know for sure how the rings form during the impact.

Many highland breccias and a few igneous rocks
are enriched compared to other lunar samples in a
set of elements not familiar to most of us. The
elements are those that tend not to enter the abundant
minerals in rocks. The result is that as a magma
crystallizes the part that is still liquid becomes
progressively richer in these special elements. The
rocks that contain them are called KREEP, for

8

plagioclase. Many of them also have surprisingly
large amounts of an iron-titanium oxide mineral
called ilmenite. The first batch had so much ilmenite
(and some other related minerals) that they were
called “high-titanium” mare basalts, in honor of the
exceptional titanium contents compared to terrestrial
basalts. The second mission, Apollo 12, returned
basalts with lower titanium concentrations, so they
were called “low-titanium” mare basalts. Subsequent missions, including an automated samplereturn mission sent by the Soviet Union, returned
some mare basalts with even lower titanium, so
they were dubbed “very-low-titanium” basalts. Most
scientists figure that mare basalts have a complete
range in titanium abundance. Data from the U. S.
Clementine Mission confirm this, and show that the

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Experiments conducted on
mare basalts and pyroclastic
glasses show that they formed
when the interior of the Moon
partially melted. (Rocks do not
have a single melting temperature like pure substances. Instead
they melt over a range of temperatures: 1000–1200°C for
some basalts, for example.) The experiments also
high-titanium basalts are not really very common on show that the melting took place at depths ranging
the Moon.
from 100 to 500 km, and that the rocks that partially
The shapes of the mineral grains and how they melted contained mostly olivine and pyroxene, with
are intergrown in mare basalts indicate that these some ilmenite in the regions that formed the highrocks formed in lava flows, some thin (perhaps a titanium basalts. An involved but sensible chain of
meter thick), others thicker (up to perhaps 30 meters). reasoning indicates that these deep rocks rich in
This is not unusual for basalt flows on Earth. Many olivine and pyroxene formed from the lunar magma
lunar mare basalts also contain holes, called vesicles, ocean: while plagioclase floated to form anorthosites
which were formed by gas bubbles trapped when the in the highlands crust, the denser minerals olivine
lava solidified. Earth basalts also have them. On and pyroxene sank. So, although the anorthosites and
Earth, the abundant gases escaping from the lava are mare basalts differ drastically in age and composicarbon dioxide and water vapor, accompanied by tion, the origins are intimately connected.
some sulfur and chlorine gases. We are not as sure
what gases escaped from lunar lavas, although we
What’s next?
know that water vapor was not one of them because
there are no hints for the presence of water or waterScientists are still working on the bounty returned
bearing minerals in any Moon rock. The best bet is a by the Apollo missions. New analytical techniques
mixture of carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide, and improved understanding of how geological prowith some sulfur gases added for good measure.
cesses work keep the field exciting and vibrant.
On Earth, when the amount of gas dissolved in Eventually we will need additional samples and
magma (the name for lava still underground) be- some extensive field work to fully understand the
comes large, it escapes violently and causes an Moon and how it came to be and continues to evolve.
explosive eruption. In places such as Hawai‘i, for These sampling and field expeditions will probably
example, the lava erupts in large fountains up to be done by a combination of robotic and piloted
several hundred meters high. The lava falls to the spacecraft.
ground in small pieces, producing a pyroclastic deIn the meantime, Nature has provided a bonus:
posit. This also happened on the Moon, producing samples from the Moon come to us free of charge in
the dark mantle deposits. One of these was sampled the form of lunar meteorites. (See companion voldirectly during the Apollo 17 mission. The sample, ume Exploring Meteorite Mysteries.) Thirteen sepacalled the “orange soil,” consists of numerous small rate meteorites have been identified so far, one found
orange glass beads. They are glass because they in Australia and the rest in Antarctica. We are sure
cooled rapidly, so there was not enough time to form that they come from the Moon on the basis of
and grow crystals in them.
appearance and chemical and isotopic composition,
Small samples of pyroclastic glasses were also but of course we do not know from where on the
found at other sites. Some are green, others yellow, Moon they come. These samples have helped supstill others red. The differences in color reflect the port the magma ocean idea. Most important, knowamount of titanium they contain. The green have the ing that meteorites can be delivered to Earth by
least (about 1 weight percent) and the red contain the impacts on the Moon lends credence to the idea that
most (14 weight percent), more than even the highest we have some meteorites from Mars. The Martian
titanium basalt.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

9

meteorites are collectively called SNC meteorites. If
we did not know so much about the Moon we would
never have been able to identify meteorites from the
Moon, and, therefore, would not have been able to
argue as convincingly that some meteorites come
from Mars.

From the Moon, free of charge
The first lunar meteorite discovered in Antarctica hails from the lunar highlands and,
like most highlands rocks, it is an impact breccia. The lunar meteorites prove that
objects can be blasted off sizable objects without melting them, adding credence to
the idea that a group of twelve meteorites comes from Mars.

MOONQUAKES, THE MOON’S
INTERIOR, AND THE MYSTERIOUS
MAGNETIC FIELD
The Moon does not shake, rattle, and roll as Earth
does. Almost all moonquakes are smaller than Earth’s
constant grumblings. The largest quakes reach only
about magnitude 5 (strong enough to cause dishes to
fall out of cabinets), and these occur about once a
year. This is clear evidence that the Moon is not at
present geologically active. No internal motions
drive crustal plates as on Earth, or initiate hot spots
to give rise to volcanic provinces like Hawai‘i. This
seismic inactivity is a wonderful virtue in the eyes
of astronomers. Combined with the lack of an
atmosphere to cause stars to twinkle, the low moonquake activity makes the Moon an ideal place to
install telescopes.
We know about moonquakes from four seis-

10

mometers set up by the Apollo missions. Besides
telling us how many and how strong moonquakes
are, the data acquired by the Apollo seismic network
help us figure out something about the nature of the
Moon’s interior. On Earth, seismology has allowed
us to know that the planet has a thin crust (20-60 km
over continents, 8-10 km over ocean basins), a thick
silicate mantle (down to 2900 km), and a large
metallic iron core (2900 km to the center at 6370 km).
The Moon is quite different. The crust is thicker than
Earth’s continental crust, ranging from 70 km on the
Earth-facing side to perhaps 150 km on the farside.
The mare basalts represent a thin veneer on this
mostly plagioclase-rich crust, averaging only about 1
km in thickness (inferred mostly from photogeological
studies). Evidence from samples collected on the
rims of the large basins Imbrium and Serentatis and
from remote sensing instruments carried onboard
two Apollo missions, the Clementine Mission, and
the forthcoming Lunar Prospector Mission suggest
that the lower crust may not contain as much plagioclase as does the upper half of the crust. Beneath the
crust is the lunar mantle, which is the largest part of
the Moon. There might be a difference in rock types
above and below a depth of 500 km, perhaps representing the depth of the lunar magma ocean. Beneath
the mantle lies a small lunar core made of metallic
iron. The size of the core is highly uncertain, with
estimates ranging from about 100 km to 400 km.
That little core is important, though. The Moon
does not have much of a magnetic field, so the lunar
core is not generating magnetism the way Earth’s
core is. Nevertheless, it did in the past. Lunar rocks
are magnetized, and the strength of the magnetic field
has been measured by special techniques. Also, older
rocks have stronger magnetism, suggesting that the
Moon’s magnetic field was stronger in the distant
past, and then decreased to its weak present state.
Why this happened is unknown. What is known is
this: you cannot navigate around the Moon using a
compass!
There are other mysteries about the Moon’s
magnetism. Although the field was always weak and
is extremely weak now, there are small areas on the
Moon that have magnetic fields much stronger than
the surrounding regions. These magnetic anomalies
have not been figured out. Some scientists have
associated them with the effects of large, basinforming impacts. Others have suggested that the

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Moon forming together, a two-body
system from the start. This idea has
trouble explaining Earth’s rotation
rate and how the moon-forming
material got into orbit around Earth
and stayed there, rather than falling
to Earth. (These problems with total amount of spinning involve both
Earth’s rotation and the Moon’s
motion around Earth. The amount
of rotation and revolving is
quantified by a physical property
called angular momentum.) The
problem was so frustrating that
some scientists suggested that
maybe science had proved that the
Moon does not exist!
The annoying problems with
the
classical hypotheses of lunar
Inside the Moon and Earth
origin led scientists to consider alScientists have learned what Earth and the Moon are like inside by several techniques, the most important
ternatives. This search led to the
of which is seismology, the study of earthquake (and, of course) moonquake waves. Earth has a much
seemingly outlandish idea that the
larger metallic core than does the Moon.
Moon formed when a projectile the
ionized gases produced when comets impact the size of the planet Mars (half Earth’s radius and oneMoon might give rise to strong magnetic anomalies tenth its mass) smashed into Earth when it had grown
in the crater ejecta. The jury is still out. The Lunar to about 90% of its present size. The resulting exploProspector Mission will thoroughly map the distri- sion sent vast quantities of heated material into orbit
bution of magnetic anomalies, perhaps helping to around Earth, and the Moon formed from this debris.
This new hypothesis, which blossomed in 1984 from
solve this mystery.
seeds planted in the mid-1970s, is called the giant
THE MOON’S ORIGIN: A BIG WHACK impact theory. It explains the way Earth spins and
why Earth has a larger metallic core than does the
ON THE GROWING EARTH
Moon. Furthermore, modern theories for how the
For a long time, the most elusive mystery about planets are assembled from smaller bodies, which
the Moon was how it formed. The problem baffled were assembled from still smaller ones, predict that
philosophers and scientists for hundreds of years. All when Earth was almost done forming, there would
of the hypotheses advanced for lunar origin had fatal have been a body nearby with a mass about one-tenth
flaws, even though partisans tried tenaciously to that of Earth. Thus, the giant impact hypothesized to
explain away the defects. The capture hypothesis, have formed the Moon is not an implausible event.
which depicts capture of a fully formed Moon by The chances are so high, in fact, that it might have
Earth, suffered from improbability. Close encounter been unavoidable.
One would think that an impact between an
with Earth would either result in a collision or fling
the Moon into a different orbit around the Sun, almost Earth-sized planet and a Mars-sized planet
probably never to meet up with Earth again. The would be catastrophic. The energy involved is infission hypothesis, in which the primitive Earth spins comprehensible. Much more than a trillion trillion
so fast that a blob flies off, could not explain how tons of material vaporized and melted. In some
Earth got to be spinning so fast (once every 2.5 hours) places in the cloud around the Earth, temperatures
and why Earth and the Moon no longer spin that fast. exceeded 10,000°C. A fledgling planet the size of
The double-planet hypothesis pictures Earth and the Mars was incorporated into Earth, its metallic core
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

11

and all, never to be seen again. Yes, this sounds
catastrophic. But out of it all, the Moon was created
and Earth grew to almost its final size. Without this
violent event early in the Solar System’s history,
there would be no Moon in Earth’s sky, and Earth
would not be rotating as fast as it is because the big
impact spun it up. Days might even last a year. But
then, maybe we would not be here to notice.

was at least 500 km deep. The first minerals to form
in this mind-boggling magmatic system were the
iron and magnesium silicates olivine and pyroxene.
They were denser than the magma, so they sank, like
rocks in a pond, though not as fast. Eventually,
plagioclase feldspar formed, and because it was less
dense than the magma, began to float to the top, like
bubbles in cola. It accumulated and produced mountains of anorthosite, producing the first lunar crust.
The magma ocean phase ended by about 4.4 billion
years ago. [See the “Differentiation” activity on
Pages 57–60.]

WHACK!
The Moon may have formed when an object the size of the planet Mars smashed
into Earth when our future home was about 90% constructed. This fierce event
made Earth larger and blasted off vaporized and melted material into orbit. The
Moon formed from this debris. This painting was created by William K. Hartmann,
one of the scientists who invented the giant impact hypothesis for lunar origin.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE MOON
Sinking and floating in an ocean of magma

We know the general outlines of what happened
to the Moon after it was formed by a giant impact.
The first notable event, which may have been a
consequence of the giant impact, was the formation
and crystallization of the magma ocean. Nobody
knows how deep it was, but the best guess is that it

12

Soon after it formed, the Moon was surrounded by a huge shell of molten rock
called the lunar magma ocean. As crystals formed in it, the denser ones such as
olivine and pyroxene sank and the less dense ones, such as feldspar, floated
upwards, forming the original anorthosite crust on the Moon. Dropping toothpicks
and pennies into a glass of water shows the process: the toothpicks (representing
feldspar) float and the pennies (olivine and pyroxene) sink.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Almost as soon as the crust had formed, perhaps
while it was still forming, other types of magmas that
would form the norites and troctolites in the highlands crust began to form deep in the Moon. A great
mystery is where inside the Moon and how deep.
Many lunar specialists believe the magmas derived
from unmelted Moon stuff beneath the magma ocean.
In any case, these magmas rose and infiltrated the
anorthosite crust, forming large and small rock bodies, and perhaps even erupting onto the surface.
Some of the magmas reacted chemically with the
dregs of the magma ocean (KREEP) and others may
have dissolved some of the anorthosite. This period
of lunar history ended about 4.0 billion years ago.
All during these first epochs, left-over projectiles
continued to bombard the Moon, modifying the
rocks soon after they formed. The crust was mixed to
a depth of at least a few kilometers, perhaps as much
as 20 km, as if a gigantic tractor had plowed the lunar
crust. Though not yet proven, the rate of impact may
have declined between 4.5 and 4.0 billion years ago,
but then grew dramatically, producing most of the large
basins visible on the Moon. This cataclysmic bombardment is postulated to have lasted from 4.0 to 3.85
billion years ago. [See the “Impact Craters” activity
on Pages 61–70, and the “Regolith Formation”
activity on Pages 47–52.]
Once the bombardment rate had settled down,
the maria could form. Basalts like those making up
the dark mare surfaces formed before 3.85 billion
years ago, but not as voluminously as later, and the
enormous bombardment rate demolished whatever
lava plains formed. However, between 3.7 and about
2.5 billion years ago (the lower limit is highly uncertain), lavas flowed across the lunar surface, forming
the maria and decorating the Moon’s face. Along with
the basalts came pyroclastic eruptions, high fountains of fire that launched glowing droplets of molten
basalt on flights up to a few hundred kilometers.
Since mare volcanism ceased, impact has been
the only geological force at work on the Moon. Some
impressive craters have been made, such as
Copernicus (90 km across) and Tycho (85 km).
These flung bright rays of material across the dark
lunar landscape, adding more decoration. In fact,
some of the material blasted from Tycho caused a
debris slide at what would become the Apollo 17
landing site. Samples from this site indicate that the
landslide and some associated craters formed about

110 million years ago. This, therefore, is the age of
the crater Tycho. It is a triumph of geological savvy
that we were able to date an impact crater that lies
over 2000 km from the place we landed!
The impacts during the past billions of years also
have mixed the upper several meters of crust to make
the powdery lunar regolith. The Sun has continued to
implant a tiny amount of itself into the regolith,
giving us its cryptic record and providing resources
for future explorers. And recently, only seconds ago
in geologic time, a few interplanetary travelers left
their footprints here and there on the dusty ground.

Anatomy of an impact crater
The crater Tycho in the southern highlands on the lunar nearside is 85 kilometers
across. Its terraced walls rise 3 to 4 kilometers above its floor. Its rim rises above the
surrounding terrain, and its floor sits below it. Smooth material on the floor of the
crater consists of impact-melted rock that flowed like lava across the growing floor
in the later stages of excavation. In response to the huge increase then decrease in
pressure, mountains two kilometers high rose from its floor, bringing up material
from as much as ten kilometers in the crust. The blanket of material surrounding the
crater is called the ejecta blanket; this pile of debris becomes progressively thinner
away from the crater (especially evident on the left of the photo).

Although not visible on this photograph, large craters like Tycho also have rays
emanating from them. Rays form when materials thrown out of the crater land and
excavate more of the lunar landscape along arcuate paths. The Tycho event caused
a landslide and several secondary impacts at the Apollo 17 landing site, over 2000
kilometers away. Analysis of samples collected during the Apollo 17 mission indicates
that these events took place 110 million years ago. Thus, Tycho formed 110 million
years ago.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

13

THE MOON AND EARTH:
INEXORABLY INTERTWINED
The Moon ought to be especially alluring to
people curious about Earth. The two bodies formed
near each other, formed mantles and crusts early,
shared the same post-formational bombardment, and
have been bathed in the same flux of sunlight and
solar particles for the past 4.5 billion years. Here are
a few examples of the surprising ways in which lunar
science can contribute to understanding how Earth
works and to unraveling its geological history.
Origin of the Earth-Moon System. No matter how
the Moon formed, its creation must have had dramatic effects on Earth. Although most scientists have
concluded that the Moon formed as a result of an
enormous impact onto the growing Earth, we do not
know much about the details of that stupendous
event. We do not know if the Moon was made mostly
from Earth materials or mostly projectile, the kinds
of chemical reactions that would have taken place in
the melt-vapor cloud, and precisely how the Moon
was assembled from this cloud.
Magma oceans. The concept that the Moon had a
magma ocean has been a central tenet of lunar science since it sprung from fertile minds after the
return of the first lunar samples in 1969. It is now
being applied to Earth, Mars, and asteroids. This
view of the early stages of planet development is
vastly different from the view in the 1950s and
1960s. Back then, most (not all) scientists believed
the planets assembled cold, and then heated up. The
realization that the Moon had a magma ocean changed
all that and has led to a whole new way of looking at
Earth’s earliest history.

extinctions are not understood. One possibility is that
some mass-extinction events were caused by periodic increases in the rate of impact on Earth. For
example, the mass extinctions, which included the
demise of the dinosaurs, at the end of the Cretaceous
period (65 million years ago), may have been caused
by a large impact event. Attempts to test the idea by
dating impact craters on Earth are doomed because
there are too few of them. But the Moon has plenty
of craters formed during the past 600 million years
(the period for which we have a rich fossil record).
These could be dated and the reality of spikes in the
impact record could be tested.
How geologic processes operate. The Moon is a
natural laboratory for the study of some of the geologic processes that have shaped Earth. It is a great
place to study the details of how impact craters form
because there are so many well-preserved craters in
an enormous range of sizes. It is also one of the places
where volcanism has operated, but at lower gravity
than on either Earth or Mars.
LIFE AND WORK AT
A MOON BASE

People will someday return to the Moon. When
they do, it will be to stay. They will build a base on
the Moon, the first settlement in the beginning of an
interplanetary migration that will eventually take
them throughout the Solar System.
There will be lots to do at a lunar base. Geologists
will study the Moon with the intensity and vigor
they do on Earth, with emphasis on field studies.
Astronomers will make magnificent observations of
the universe. Solar scientists will study the solar
Early bombardment history of Earth and Moon. wind directly and investigate past activity trapped in
The thousands of craters on the Moon’s surface layers of regolith. Writers and artists will be inspired
chronicle the impact record of Earth. Most of the by a landscape so different from Earth’s. Life sciencraters formed before 3.9 billion years ago. Some tists will study how people adapt to a gravity field
scientists argue that the Moon suffered a cataclysmic one-sixth as strong as Earth’s, and figure out how to
bombardment (a drastic increase in the number of grow plants in lunar greenhouses. Engineers will
impacting projectiles) between 3.85 and 4.0 billion investigate how to keep a complex facility operating
years ago. If this happened and Earth was subjected continuously in a hostile environment. Mining and
to the blitzkrieg as well, then development of Earth’s chemical engineers will determine how to extract
earliest crust would have been affected. The intense resources from Moon rocks and regolith. The seembombardment could also have influenced the devel- ingly dry lunar surface contains plenty of the ingreopment of life, perhaps delaying its appearance.
dients to support life at a Moon base (oxygen and
Impacts, extinctions, and the evolution of life on hydrogen for water, nitrogen and carbon for the
Earth. The mechanisms of evolution and mass growth of plants), including the construction

14

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

The Curatorial Facility is one of the cleanest
places you’ll ever see. To
go inside, you must wear
white suits, boots, hats, and
gloves, outfits affectionately known as “bunny
suits.” Wipe a gloved hand
on a stainless steel cabinet
and you will not find a
trace of dust because the
air is filtered to remove
potential contaminating
particles.
The samples are stored
in a large vault, and only
one at a time is moved to a
glove box. You can pick
up the rocks by jamming
Geology at a Moon Base
your hands into a pair of
The best geology is done in the field. To understand rocks we must examine them up close, map their distributions, see the
the black rubber gloves,
structures in them, and chip off samples when necessary. The field geology done during the Apollo missions was hampered
allowing you to turn a rock
by the lack of time the astronauts could devote to it. But that will change when people live permanently on the Moon.
over, to sense its mass and
Geologists will be able to spend as much time as they need to decipher the story recorded by lunar rock formations. This
density, to connect with it.
painting shows three astronauts (one in the distance) examining the outside of a lava tube, an underground conduit that
A stereomicroscope alcarried red-hot lava to an eruption site perhaps hundreds of kilometers away.
lows you to look at it
closely. If you decide you
need a sample, and of course you have been approved
materials to build and maintain the base (regolith to obtain one, then expert lunar sample processors
can be molded into bricks; iron, titanium, and alumi- take over. The sample is photographed before and
num can be smelted and forged into tools and build- after the new sample is chipped off. This is time
ing materials). It will be an exciting, high-tech, consuming, but valuable to be sure we know the
faraway place inhabited by adventurous souls. [See relationships of all samples to each other. In many
the Unit 3 activities beginning on Page 99.]
cases, we can determine the orientation a specific
part of a rock was in on the surface of the Moon
WHERE MOON ROCKS
before collection.
HANG OUT
A select small number of pieces of the Moon are
on display in public museums, and only three pieces
Since arrival on Earth, lunar samples have been can actually be touched. These so-called lunar
treated with the respect they deserve. Most of the "touchstones" were all cut from the same Apollo 17
treasure of Apollo is stored at the Lunar Curatorial basaltic rock. One touchstone is housed at the
Facility at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Smithsonian Air and Space Museum in Washington,
A small percentage is stored in an auxiliary facility at D.C. Another touchstone is at the Space Center
Brooks Air Force Base near San Antonio, Texas, Houston facility adjacent to the Johnson Space Cenplaced there in case a disaster, such as a hurricane, ter. A third touchstone is on long-term loan to the
befalls Houston and the samples are destroyed. Many Museo de Las Ciencias at the Universidad Nacional
small samples are also in the laboratories of investi- Autonoma de Mexico. Visitors to these exhibits
gators around the world, where enthusiastic scien- marvel at the unique experience of touching a piece
tists keep trying to wring out the Moon’s secrets.
of the Moon with their bare hands.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

15

The Original Moon
Four and a half æons ago
a dark, dusty cloud deformed.
Sun became star; Earth became large,
and Moon, a new world, was born.
This Earth/Moon pair, once linked so close,
would later be forced apart.
Images of young intimate ties
we only perceive in part.
Both Earth and Moon were strongly stripped
of their mantle siderophiles.
But Moon alone was doomed to thirst
from depletion of volatiles.
Safe haven for precious rocks
NASA stores the lunar sample collection in a specially constructed facility called the Lunar Curatorial
Facility at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The priceless materials remain in a nitrogen
atmosphere, which is far less reactive chemically than normal oxygen-rich air. Scientists working in the
facility wear lint-free outfits affectionately known as “bunny suits,” and handle the samples in glove
boxes. In this photograph, Roberta Score is examining a piece of an Apollo 16 rock, while Andrea Mosie
(left) looks on.

Moon holds secrets of ages past
when planets dueled for space.
As primordial crust evolved
raw violence reworked Moon’s face.
After the first half billion years
huge permanent scars appeared;
ancient feldspathic crust survived
with a mafic mantle mirror.
But then there grew from half-lived depths
a new warmth set free inside.
Rivers and floods of partial melt
resurfaced the low ‘frontside’.

SCIENTISTS AS POETS
Scientists do not view the world in purely objective ways.
Each has biases and a unique way of looking at the world. Science
is not done solely with piles of data, hundreds of graphs, or pages
of equations. It is done with the heart and soul, too. Sometimes
a scientist is moved to write about it in elegant prose like that
written by Loren Eisley or in poetry, like the poem written by
Professor Carlé Pieters of Brown University. Dr. Pieters holds
her doctorate from MIT and is an expert in remote sensing of
planetary surfaces. She is especially well known for her telescopic observations of the Moon. The poem first appeared in the
frontispiece of Origin of the Moon, published by the Lunar and
Planetary Institute.

Thus evolved the Original Moon
in those turbulent times.
Now we paint from fragments of clues
the reasons and the rhymes:
Sister planet;
Modified clone;
Captured migrant;
Big splash disowned?
The Truth in some or all of these
will tickle, delight,
temper, and tease.

— Carlé Pieters

16

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Moon ABCs Fact Sheet
Property

Earth

Moon

Brain Busters

Equatorial
diameter

12,756 km

3,476 km

How long would it take to drive
around the Moon's equator at
80 km per hour?

Surface area

510 million
square km

37.8 million
square km

The Moon's surface area is
similar to that of one of Earth's
continents. Which one?

Mass

5.98 x 1024 kg

7.35 x 1022 kg

What percentage of Earth's mass
is the Moon's mass?

Volume

---

---

Can you calculate the volumes of
Earth and the Moon?

Density

5.52 grams per
cubic cm

3.34 grams per
cubic cm

Check this by calculating the
density from the mass and
volume.

Surface
gravity

9.8 m/sec/sec

1.63 m/sec/sec

What fraction of Earth's gravity is
the Moon's gravity?

Crust

Silicate rocks.
Continents
dominated by
granites. Ocean
crust dominated
by basalt.

Silicate rocks.
Highlands
dominated by
feldspar-rich
rocks and maria
by basalt.

What portion of each body is
crust?

Mantle

Silicate rocks
dominated by
minerals
containing iron
and magnesium.

Similar to Earth.

Collect some silicate rocks and
determine the density. Is the
density greater or lesser than the
Earth/Moon's density? Why?

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

17

Moon ABCs Fact Sheet
Property

Earth

Moon

Brain Busters

Core

Iron, nickel metal Same, but core is
What portion of each body is
much smaller
core?
Sediment or
Silicon and
Silicon and oxygen
Do you think life ever existed
Regolith
oxygen bound in bound in minerals,
on the Moon?
minerals that
glass produced by
Why or why not?
contain water,
meteorite impacts,
plus organic
small amounts of
materials.
gases (e.g., hydrogen)
implanted by the solar
wind. No water or
organic materials.
Atmosphere
78 % nitrogen,
Basically none. Some Could you breathe the lunar
(main
21 % oxygen
carbon gases (CO2 , atmosphere?
constituents)
CO, and methane),
but very little of them.
Pressure is about onetrillionth of Earth's
atmospheric pressure.
Length of day 23.93 hours
How long does daylight last
27.3 Earth days
(sidereal
on the Moon?
rotation
period)
Air temperature
Surface
Surface temperature Why are the temperatures of
ranges from
temperature
ranges from -193oC Earth and the Moon so
-88oC (winter in
different?
(night in polar
o
polar regions) to
regions) to 111 C
o
58 C (summer in (day in equatorial
tropical regions). regions).
Surface
features

18

25 % land
(seven continents)
with varied terrain
of mountains,
plains, river valleys. Ocean floor
characterized by
mountains, plains.

84 % heavily-cratered Compare maps of Earth and
highlands.
the Moon. Is there any
16 % basalt-covered evidence that plate tectonics
maria.
operated on the Moon?
Impact craters-some with bright rays,
crater chains, and
rilles.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Rock ABCs Fact Sheet
What are minerals?
Minerals are naturally occurring solids that have definite chemical compositions and
are crystalline. Crystals are individual pieces of minerals. The most important characteristic of crystals is the orderly internal arrangement of atoms. This internal order causes the
beautiful crystal shapes.
MINERAL

ELEMENTS

APPEARANCE IN MOON ROCKS

Plagioclase feldspar

calcium (Ca), aluminum,
silicon (Si), Oxygen (O)

Whitish to translucent grayish; usually occurs as
grains longer than they are wide.

Pyroxene

iron (Fe), magnesium,
(Mg), calcium (Ca),
silicon (Si), oxygen (O)

Brown to black; grains usually longer than wide
in mare basalts, somewhat squarish in highland
rocks.

Olivine

iron (Fe), magnesium
(Mg), silicon (Si),
oxygen (O)

Greenish; usually occurs as roundish crystals.

Ilmenite

iron (Fe), titanium (Ti),
oxygen (O)

Black, elongated to squarish crystals.

What are rocks?
Rocks are naturally occurring solids composed of one or more minerals. At least
two abundant minerals usually occur in a rock, along with several others. The minerals are
intergrown in intricate ways that depend on how the rock formed. Rocks are classified on
the basis of the abundance of the minerals they contain, sizes of individual crystals, and
the process that formed the rocks.
Approximate mineral abundances (percents) in Moon rocks

Highland rocks
Anorthosite
Norite
Troctolite
Mare basalts
High-titanium
Low-titanium
Very-low titanium

Plagioclase

Pyroxene

Olivine

90%
60%
60%

5%
35%
5%

5%
5%
35%

0%
0%
0%

30%
30%
35%

54%
60%
55%

3%
5%
8%

18%
5%
2%

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Ilmenite

19

Progress in Lunar Science
Topic

1959 View

Early 1969 View

Post-Apollo View
1975

1997 View

Surface
Material

Volcanic ash, impact
debris, fluffy dust.

Probably impact debris, Impact debris derived
but other ideas not
from underlying rock
ruled out.
layer or bare rock?

Regolith formation now
modeled by computer.

Craters

Impact or volcanic?

Majority impact;
unknown percentage
of volcanic origin.

Almost all impact;
many rocks affected
by impacts.

More is known about
how material is thrown
out of a growing crater.

Maria

Impact or volcanic?

Probably volcanic.

Definitely volcanic.

Better understanding
of eruption conditions.

Composition of Unknown
Maria

Probably basalt.

Definitely basalt.

Wide variety of basalt
types.

Composition of Unknown
Highlands

Probably rocks with
more aluminum and
less iron than mare
basalt.

Rocks high in
aluminum with large
percentages of
feldspar.

Wide variety of rock
types, but all containing more aluminum
than mare basalt.

Composition of Unknown
Farside

Mare areas less
abundant than on the
nearside.

Highlands similar to
nearside highlands.

Highlands containing
rocks rich in
aluminum.

Composition of Unknown
Mantle

No progress.

High content of olivine Amounts and compoand pyroxene.
sition of olivine and
pyroxene vary.

Nature of Core Smaller than Earth's.

No progress.

Smaller than 500 km.

Smaller than 250 km.

Moon contains no
water or organic compounds, and other
volatiles much lower
than on Earth.

There might be water
brought in by comets
and trapped in very
cold places at the
South Pole.

Uncertain, but probably Highlands: older than
ancient (more than a
3.9 billion years.
few billion years).
Maria: 3.2 - 3.7 billion
years.

Highlands: most
igneous rocks older
than 4.1 billion years,
with anorthosites 4.4
billion years.
Maria: some as young
as about 2 billion
years others as old as
4.3 billion years.

Volatiles
(such as water)
and Organic
Compounds

Unknown, though
No progress.
some scientists thought
water had flowed on
Moon's surface.

Rock Ages

Unknown

Magma Ocean Not even conceived.

Origin

20

No progress.

Captured, derived from No progress.
Earth, or dual planet?

Highlands formed from Anorthosites formed
huge magma system
from magma ocean;
more than 300km deep. other highland rocks
formed after that.
Moon and Earth
Giant impact on Earth,
probably related, so
followed by formation
capture idea less likely. of Moon in Earth orbit.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

my notes

Nearside of the Moon
Apollo Landing Sites

15
*
14
* *
12

17*
11
*
16*

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

21

22

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Unit 1
Pre-Apollo Activities
Distance to the Moon
Diameter of the Moon
Reaping Rocks
Before Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin Jr.
stepped on the Moon on July 20, 1969, people had studied the Moon by eye,
telescope, and images from spacecraft. The theme of Unit 1 is a basic introduction
to the Moon -- how it looks from Earth, how far away it is, and how big it is. The
activities allow students to make comparisons between the Moon and Earth as well
as to make predictions about the Moon rocks.
Encourage students to sketch and describe nightly observations of the Moon and
keep a written record of date and time. Nightly charting of the Moon helps students
recognize Moon phases as well as the bright and dark terrains.
Scale models and proportional relationships are featured in the first two activities.
The “Distance to the Moon” and “Diameter of the Moon” activities introduce
students to techniques of measuring distances in space indirectly.
This unit also includes an activity to collect and study rocks called “Reaping
Rocks.” This activity should follow a more comprehensive lesson on basic rock
and mineral identification. The activity also extends learning to the Moon and asks
students to predict how their rock collections will compare with lunar samples.
A Resource Section for Unit 1 is on Page 24.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

23

Unit 1
Resource Section
This list presents possible independent and commercial sources of items to complement the activities in Unit
1. The sources are offered without recommendation or endorsement by NASA. Inquiries should be made
directly to the appropriate source to determine availability, cost, and ordering information before sending
money. Contact your NASA Educator Resource Center (see Page 146) for more lists of resources available
directly from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Maps
The Earth's Moon by National Geographic Society.
Wall map showing nearside and farside. Also includes graphics with captions explaining eclipses,
lunar phases, tides, and other phenomena. U.S. and
Soviet landing/impact sites are shown. The reverse
side has an index of lunar named features and
selected photographs from the Apollo missions.
National Geographic Society
Educational Services, Department 91
Washington, D.C. 20036
1-800-368-2728 or FAX 1-301-921-1575
Giant Moon Map by Rand McNally. Wall map
showing the nearside. Contact Rand McNally directly, or order it through:
Astronomical Society of the Pacific
390 Ashton Ave.
San Francisco, CA 94112
1-415-337-2624
Maps of Earth, Moon, Mars, etc.
U.S. Geological Survey Map Sales
Box 25286
Denver Federal Center
Denver, CO 80225
303-236-7477
(Ask for Customer Service)
Globes
Edmund Scientific Co.
101 E. Gloucester Pike
Barrington, NJ 08007-1380
1-609-573-6270 or FAX 1-609-573-6295

24

Lunar Phase Calendars
Celestial Products
P.O. Box 801
Middleburg, VA 22117
1-800-235-3783 or FAX 1-703-338-4042
Earth Rock Sample Sets
Ward's Natural Science Establishment, Inc.
P.O. Box 92912
Rochester, NY 14692-9012
1-800-962-2660
Slides
Glorious Eclipses slide set
Astronomical Society of the Pacific
390 Ashton Ave.
San Francisco, CA 94112
1-415-337-2624
Other Teacher's Guides
Exploring Meteorite Mysteries: Teacher's Guide
with Activities, NASA EG-1997-08-104-HQ.
M. Lindstrom et. al., 1997
Companion volume available from NASA Educator
Resource Centers or CORE (refer to Page 146 of
this book.)
Return to the Moon: Moon Activities Teacher's
Guide, 1990
Challenger Center for Space Science Education
1101 King Street, Suite 190
Alexandria, VA 22314
1-703-683-9740

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Distance to the Moon
Purpose
To calculate the distance between scale models of
Earth and the Moon.

Background
As long as people have looked at the Moon, they have wondered how far away it is
from Earth. The average distance to the Moon is 382,500 km. The distance varies
because the Moon travels around Earth in an elliptical orbit. At perigee, the point at
which the Moon is closest to Earth, the distance is approximately 360,000 km. At
apogee, the point at which the Moon is farthest from Earth, the distance is approximately 405,000 km.
Distance from Earth to the Moon for a given date can be obtained by asking a local
planetarium staff. Students interested in astronomy may enjoy looking at The
Astronomical Almanac printed yearly by the U.S. Government printing office.
When the Apollo 11 crew landed on the Moon on July 20, 1969, they were
393,309 km away from home.
In this activity students will use simple sports balls as scale models of Earth and the
Moon. Given the astronomical distance between Earth and the Moon, students will
determine the scale of the model system and the distance that must separate the two
models.
The “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet” lists the Earth's diameter as 12,756 km and the Moon's
diameter as 3,476 km. Therefore, the Moon's diameter is 27.25% of Earth's diameter.
An official basketball has a diameter of 24 cm. This can serve as a model for Earth. A
tennis ball has a diameter of 6.9 cm which is close to 27.25% of the basketball. (The
tennis ball is actually 28.8% the size of the basketball.) These values are very close to
the size relationship between Earth and the Moon. The tennis ball, therefore, can be
used as a model of the Moon.
The scale of the model system is determined by setting the diameter of the basketball
equal to the diameter of Earth. This is written as a simple relationship shown below:
24 cm = 12,756 km
Expressed more simply, 1 cm in the model system equals 531.5 km in space:
1 cm = 531.5 km
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

25

Teacher Page

Distance to the Moon
Using this scale, the basketball-tennis ball separation in centimeters (x) is derived:
x = 382,500 km = 719.7 cm
531.5 km
The value x may be rounded to 720 cm and converted to meters so that the students
need to place the basketball and tennis ball 7.2 m apart.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet.
If it is not possible to obtain an official-size basketball and tennis ball, then you can use
other spherical objects or circles drawn on paper. Clay balls may be used as models.
For example, for two clay balls, 10 cm diameter and 2.7 cm diameter, the scale is
1 cm = 1,275.6 km. At this scale, students need to separate the clay balls by 3 m.

In Class
Divide the students into cooperative groups. Students must keep track of units of
measure.

Wrap Up
Did the students have an accurate idea of the size relationship between Earth and the
Moon before doing this activity?
Did the effect of separating the scale models help them visualize the distance to the
Moon?

Extensions
1. How long did it take Apollo astronauts to travel to the Moon?
2. Have students measure the circumferences of various spheres so that each group uses
a different pair of models.
3. Instead of using the average distance to the Moon, use the distance from
July 20, 1969, to recall the Apollo 11 landing or use the distance for today.

26

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Distance to the Moon
Purpose
To calculate the distance between scale models of
Earth and the Moon.

Key Word

Procedure

scale

1. If Earth were the size of an official basketball, then
the Moon would be the size of: another basketball? soccer ball? baseball? tennis ball? golf
ball? marble?

Materials
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
sports balls
calculator
meter tape

2. The diameter of Earth in kilometers is:
3. The diameter of the Moon in kilometers is:
4. What percentage of Earth's diameter is the Moon's
diameter?
5. Use the list below to change or confirm your
answer to Question 1.

official basketball
size 5 soccer ball
official baseball
tennis ball
golf ball
marble

diameter in cm
24
22
7.3
6.9
4.3
0.6

If Earth is a basketball, then the Moon is a:

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

27

Distance to the Moon
6. Use an official basketball as a model of Earth. Use a second
ball, the one you determined from Question 5, as a model of the
Moon.
7. Determine the scale of your model system by setting the
diameter of the basketball equal to the diameter of Earth.
cm =

km

1 cm =

therefore,

km

8. If the distance to the Moon from Earth is 382,500 km, then how
far apart must you separate the two scale models to accurately
depict the Earth/Moon system?
Using the scale value in the box from Step 7, the model separation in centimeters (x) is derived:
x = actual distance to the Moon in kilometers
scale value in kilometers

x =

x =

centimeters

The two scale models must be separated by

meters.

9. Set up your scale model of the Earth/Moon system. Does it fit
in your classroom?

28

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Diameter of the Moon
Purpose
To calculate the diameter of the Moon using
proportions.

Background
The diameter of the Moon is proportional to the diameter of a cardboard disk, given that
you know the distance to the Moon and the distance to the cardboard disk.
The relationship is:
d
l

D
L

so that:
D = L(d/l)
where

D
d
L
l

= diameter of Moon
= diameter of cardboard disk
= distance to Moon
= distance to cardboard disk

In this activity, students will measure d and l. They will be given L.
They will calculate D.
The diameter of the Moon (D) is 3,476 km.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet.
Choose a day and location for this activity which is best for viewing a full Moon.
A cardboard disk of 2 cm diameter works well. Better accuracy may be achieved by
using a larger disk, thus a greater distance l. However, if obtaining or cutting cardboard
is difficult, then this activity can also be done with dimes. A dime held out at arm's
length will cover the Moon.
The distance from Earth to the Moon for a given date can be obtained by asking a local
planetarium staff, Or for this activity, students may use an average value of
382,500 km.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

29

Teacher Page

Diameter of the Moon
In Class
If students work in pairs, then one student can use the string to measure distance from
their partner's eye to the disk.
The same units do not have to be used on both sides of the equation, but d and l have to
be the same units. The D will be the same unit as L.

Wrap-Up
To compute the density of the Moon use the diameter to compute volume and use the
mass value of 7.35 x 1022 kg.
Density of the Moon is 3.34 grams/cubic cm.

30

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Diameter of the Moon
Purpose
To calculate the diameter of the Moon using
proportions.

Key Words

Procedure

proportional

1. On a day when you can see the Moon: place a
cardboard disk on top of a stake or on a
window sill so that it exactly covers the Moon
from your point of view behind the cardboard
disk.

Materials
2-cm wide cardboard disk
wooden stake (optional)
meter stick
calculator
string

2. Have a friend measure the distance from
your eye to the cardboard disk.
Call this distance l and write the value here:
l=
3. The distance from Earth to the Moon varies
between 360,000 km and 405,000 km. Find the
distance for today’s date or use an average value
for your calculations of 382,500 km.
Write the value that you are going to use here:
L=
4. What is the diameter of the cardboard disk?
d=

5. The diameter of the Moon is proportional to the
diameter of your cardboard disk by this equation:
d D
l L

where: D
d
L
l

so that, D = L(d/l)

= diameter of Moon
= diameter of cardboard disk
= distance to Moon
= distance to cardboard disk

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

31

Diameter of the Moon
Results
1. By your calculations, the diameter of the Moon is:
D=
2. Compare your result with the accepted diameter of the Moon.
How close did you get?

3. How many times smaller is the diameter of the Moon than the
diameter of Earth?

4. When you calculated the diameter of the Moon, did you have to
use the same units on both sides of the equation?

5. How and where could you find the value for the distance to the
Moon for today's date?

6. What else would you need to know to compute the density of the
Moon? Try it.

32

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Reaping Rocks
Purpose
To make predictions about the origin of lunar rocks by
first collecting, describing, and classifying neighborhood rocks.

Background [also see “Teacher's Guide” Pages 6, 7, photo on15,16]
Geologists are scientists who study the formation, structure, history, and processes
(internal and on the surface) that change Earth and other planetary bodies.
Rocks and the minerals in them give geologists key information about the events in a
planet’s history. By collecting, describing and classifying rocks, we can learn how the
rocks were formed and what processes have changed them.
Geologists classify rocks into three types:
Igneous - rock formed when magma cools and hardens either below the surface (for
example, granite) or on the surface during volcanic events (for example, basalt).
Sedimentary - rock formed by the collection, compaction, and cementation of mineral
grains, rock fragments, and sand that are moved by wind, water, or ice to the site of deposition.
Metamorphic - rock formed when heat and/or pressure deep within the planet changes
the mineral composition and grain size of existing rocks. For example, metamorphism
changes limestone into marble.
We find all three rock types on Earth’s surface and the rocks are constantly changing
(recycling), very slowly because of heat, pressure, and exposure to weather and erosion.
The Moon's surface is dominated by igneous rocks. The lunar highlands are formed of
anorthosite, an igneous rock predominantly of calcium-rich plagioclase feldspar.
The lunar maria are made of layers of basaltic lava, not unlike the basaltic flows of the
Columbia River Plateau or of Iceland. The orange glass found on the Moon’s surface is
another product of volcanic activity. Moon rocks are not exposed to weather nor are they
eroded by wind, water, or ice. The Apollo astronaut’s footprints are as fresh as the day
they were made.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet. Spend time familiarizing the
students with rock and mineral identification.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

33

Teacher Page

Reaping Rocks
Students may need more than one copy of “My Own Rock Chart” because it has spaces
for only three samples. You may want to collect empty egg cartons, small boxes, or
trays that the students could decorate themselves to display their rocks. Use of magnifying lenses or a stereo microscope would greatly enhance observations.
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet” may come in handy during the wrap-up when students try to
make predictions about the Moon rocks.

In Class
Talk about the qualities of rocks that we can describe: shape, size, color, texture, and the place
where it was found. Then discuss the three rock classifications emphasizing that geologists
classify rocks and interpret the origins of rocks based on their observations.
Encourage students to collect a variety of rocks with different colors and textures from
your own locality, if possible. Remind them to choose naturally occurring materials
not cement or brick fragments! If it is not possible to collect rocks from the neighborhood, then try to obtain a commerically available set of common rocks. More than one
student may choose the same rock. Students could also cut out pictures of rocks from
magazines or study pictures of rocks in text books.
After each rock has been labeled with owner’s name and location where it was found,
have the students look carefully at the rock. To help them train their eyes, ask questions
like: What colors do you see? Do you see grains? Are the grains large or small? Does
the rock look glassy? Or does the rock show a banding pattern? Does the rock look
frothy with a lot of holes? Do you see pebbles cemented together? Does the rock contain fossils?
Ask students to describe their rocks with as many adjectives or descriptive phrases as
possible. Have the students classify the rocks as igneous, sedimentary, or metamorphic,
and then try to interpret the rock origins. “My Own Rock Chart” is designed to help
organize their observations and interpretations.

Wrap-up
Conclude the activity by challenging the students to predict what the lunar rocks look
like and the possible origins based on what they have just learned about Earth rocks and
based on the material in the “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet.”
Display these rock collections and keep them until the students have a chance to compare with the lunar samples in “The Lunar Disk” activity on Page 39.

34

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Reaping Rocks
Purpose
To make predictions about the origin of lunar rocks
by first collecting, describing, and classifying neighborhood rocks.

Key Words

Procedure

geologist

1. Display your rocks on a tray or egg carton,
and label each one with the location of where
you found it.

mineral
rock
igneous
sedimentary
metamorphic

Materials

2. Look carefully at each rock with and without a
magnifying lens or stereo microscope.
What details can you see under magnification?
3. Describe what you see by filling out “My Own
Rock Chart.” Use as many adjectives or
descriptive phrases as you can.

rocks
empty egg carton, box, or
other collection tray
labels
magnifying lens or stereo
microscope
“My Own Rock Chart”

4. Classify your rocks as igneous, sedimentary or
metamorphic. Try to interpret how your rocks
were formed; that is, the origins. Add this
information to your chart.
5. Now, based on your chart and the “Moon
ABCs Fact Sheet,” predict what the Moon
rocks will look like.

“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”

6. How do you think the different Moon rocks might
have formed?

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

35

Observations

Interpretations

Rock Sketch

Shape

Size

Colors

Texture

Collection Site

Classification

Origin

My Own Rock Chart

36

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Unit 2
Learning from Apollo
The Lunar Disk
Apollo Landing Sites
Regolith Formation
Lunar Surface
Differentiation
Impact Craters
Clay Lava Flows
Lava Layering
Lunar Landing Sites
Lunar Roving Vehicle
Moon Anomalies
The U.S. Space Program called Apollo achieved monumental goals including the
collection and return of rock and sediment samples from the Moon. Analyses of the
samples by scientists worldwide continue to give us new insight to the forces that
shaped the early solar system, the Moon, and maybe most importantly, Earth. This
excitement of discovery, a legacy of the Apollo program, is the theme of Unit 2.
The highlight of this unit is the Lunar Sample Disk. Classroom activities focus on the
Moon's rocks, surface features, and the geologic processes that formed them. Students
are then given the opportunity to plan their own lunar missions in the “Lunar Landing
Sites” and “Lunar Roving Vehicle” activities. The last activity of the unit presents four
anomalies of the Moon for investigation and interpretation.
A Resource Section for Unit 2 is on Page 38.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

37

Unit 2
Resource Section
This list presents possible independent and commercial sources of items to complement the activities in Unit
2. The sources are offered without recommendation or endorsement by NASA. Materials from the U.S.
Government Printing Office also are included. Inquiries should be made directly to the appropriate source
to determine availability, cost, and ordering information before sending money. Contact your NASA
Educator Resource Center (see Page 146) for more resources available directly from NASA.
Books
Apollo Over the Moon: A View From Orbit,
NASA SP-362, 1978, 255 p. Annotated picture
book of lunar geologic features. U.S. Government
Printing Office, Superintendent of Documents
P.O. Box 371954
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7054
phone 1-202-783-3238

Apollo and the Moon Landing, by Gregory Vogt,
1991, Millbrook Press, 112 p. An illustrated text
in the Missions in Space Series for grades 4-6.
Slides
The Apollo Landing Sites, set of 40 slides
Lunar and Planetary Institute
3600 Bay Area Boulevard
Houston, TX 77058-1113
phone 1-281-486-2172 or fax 1-281-486-2186

Apollo Expeditions to the Moon, NASA SP-250,
1975, 313 p. Illustrated chronicle of the Apollo
missions with a focus on the engineering and team- Videos
work that made the missions possible.
Out of This World: The Apollo Moon Landings,
U.S. Government Printing Office, same as above.
Finley-Holiday Film Corp./Steve Skootsky, 1993,
60 minutes. Historically accurate video using newly
The Moon, by Patrick Moore, 1981, Rand McNally restored NASA footage. Finley-Holiday Film Corp.
and Co., 96 p. Illustrated with maps, drawings, and P.O. Box 619
Apollo mission photographs. Also gives descriptions Whittier, CA 90608
of unmanned missions including Russian Luna probes. phone 1-800-345-6707
To Rise From Earth: An Easy to Understand
Guide to Space Flight, by Wayne Lee, 1993, Texas
Space Grant Consortium (ISBN 0-9637400-3-2),
279 p. Detailed, non-mathematical discussions of
orbital mechanics, Apollo missions, and the Shuttle.
To A Rocky Moon: A Geologist's History of
Lunar Exploration, by Don E. Wilhelms, 1993,
Univ. of Arizona Press, 477 p.

Rockets and Models
Estes Industries
P.O. Box 227
Penrose, CO 81240
Other Teacher's Guides
Exploring Meteorite Mysteries: Teacher's Guide
with Activities, NASA EG-1997-08-104-HQ.
Marilyn Lindstrom et. al., 1997.

Carrying the Fire: An Astronaut's Journeys, by Rockets: Physical Science Teacher's Guide with
Michael Collins, 1974, Ballantine Books, 488p. p. Activities, NASA EP-291.
Gregory L. Vogt, 1993.

38

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

The Lunar Disk
Purpose
To carefully look at, describe, and learn about the
origins of the six lunar samples contained in the disk.

Background

[also see "Teacher's Guide" Pages 1, 4-9, photo on
15, 16 and "About the Lunar Sample Disk" on Page iv]

The six Apollo missions that landed astronauts on the Moon returned a collection of
rocks and sediment samples weighing 382 kilograms and consisting of more than
2,000 separate samples.
Each lunar disk contains six small samples of lunar material. Descriptions of the samples
accompany every disk; included are annotated color photographs, discussion of origins,
and Apollo missions and collection sites.

Preparation
First, do the “Reaping Rocks” activity on Page 33 or spend time on a basic unit on rock
and mineral identification.
Read the rock descriptions provided with the Lunar Sample Disk.
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet.
Each student will need two copies of the “Lunar Disk Sample Chart,” there is room for
three samples per page. Use of magnifying lenses or a stereo microscope would greatly
enhance observations.
Have on hand the students' “My Own Rock Charts” for comparisons to the lunar samples.
You may also want to collect some sediment from the school yard to display on a glass
slide. Students could then compare this sediment to the lunar samples. Most likely,
evidence of life will be seen in the school yard sediment under magnification, including
plant matter, bits of plastic, fibers, etc.

In Class
The Lunar Sample Disk is a national treasure and students need to be reminded about the
proper way to handle it. The disk must be in your sight during use.
Encourage students to describe the samples with as many adjectives or descriptive
phrases as possible. The “Lunar Disk Sample Chart” will help students organize their
observations and interpretations.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

39

Teacher Page

The Lunar Disk
Note: The name of each sample is labeled on the disk and may be entered on the chart
under classification. The sediment samples, instead of being labeled regolith, are labeled "soil." Remined the students this is a misnomer because there are no organic
materials in lunar regolith.
Ask the students if their predictions of the Moon rocks were accurate.

Wrap-Up
By comparing the lunar samples with their own rock collections, students can discuss
the similarities and differences between Earth and Moon rocks. Discuss the various
ways that rocks are formed on Earth and the Moon.

40

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

The Lunar Disk
Purpose
To carefully look at, describe, and learn about the
origins of the six lunar samples contained in the disk.

Key Words

Procedure

anorthosite

1. Look at each lunar sample with and without a
magnifying lens or stereo microscope.
What details can you see under magnification?

mare basalt
orange “soil”
breccia
mare “soil”
highland “soil”

2. Describe what you see by filling out “Lunar
Disk Sample Chart.” Use as many adjectives
or descriptive phrases as you can.
3. Do the Moon rocks look like what you expected?

Materials
Lunar Disk
magnifying lens or stereo
microscope
“Lunar Disk Sample Chart”

4. Which lunar samples closely resemble rocks from
your collection?

“My Own Rock Chart”
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”

Caution
The only way to handle
the Lunar Sample Disk is
with care.
Always place it on the
soft cloth to prevent
scratchs to the surface.
The disk must always be
in the teacher's sight.

5. Based on your comparisons of Earth and Moon
rocks, what can you now say about the origins of
the lunar samples contained in the disk? Add this
information to your chart.
6. Which rock types on Earth are not found in the
lunar samples? Why?

Care for and enjoy this
national treasure.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

41

Sketch of Sample

Shape

Size

Colors

Texture

Apollo Mission/
Collection Site

Classification

Origin

Lunar Disk Sample Chart

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

42

Observations
Interpretations

Teacher Page

Apollo Landing Sites
Purpose
To learn about the locations and geology of the six
Apollo landing sites.

Background
Latitude and longitude coordinates for the Moon start at a point near the crater
Bruce. From this starting point (0o latitude, 0o longitude) locations towards the east side
of the Moon (the direction in which the sun rises) are indicated with east longitude
values. Locations towards the west side (the direction in which the sun sets) have west
longitude values. North latitude is measured towards the Moon's north pole. South
latitude is measured towards the Moon's south pole.
Twelve astronauts in six Apollo missions landed on and explored the nearside
(Earth-facing side) of the Moon between 1969 and 1972. The six landing sites were
chosen to explore different geologic terrains.
Refer to the rock descriptions included with the Lunar Sample Disk for details on where
the samples came from and who collected them. An answer chart is provided.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet.
See the Resource Section on Page 24 for sources of maps and globes.

In Class
Refer back to the Lunar Sample Disk to review the collection sites of each sample.
Ask students to consider the geologic differences of the six sites.

Wrap-up
Were the Apollo landing sites in similar terrains? Which crew was the first to work in
hilly terrain?

Extensions
1. Form cooperative teams to research each Apollo landing site (the who, what,
when, where, and why) and to report to the class.
2. Why were all six Apollo landing sites on the nearside of the Moon?
3. Why were there no further Apollo Moon landings?
4. Was Apollo the only program to land on the Moon? Discuss the unpiloted
American and Soviet missions and landings.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

43

Dec. 11, 1972

17

April 21, 1972

16

July 30, 1971

15

Jan. 31, 1971

14

Nov. 19, 1969

12

July 20, 1969

11

Landing Date

Apollo Mission

Apollo Landing Sites Chart
Longitude

Latitude

Major Geologic Features and Rock Types
(rock types underlined are found in the Lunar Sample Disk)

23 oE

23 oW

17 oW

4 oE

16 oE

31 oE

1 oN

3 oS

3 oS

26 oN

9 oS

20 oN

Mare (Sea of Tranquillity), basaltic lava.
Mare (Ocean of Storms), rocks are basaltic lava;
ray from Copernicus Crater crosses the site.

Highlands (Fra Mauro formation) - thought to be ejecta
from the Imbrium Basin.

Mare (Hadley Rille in a mare area near the margin of
Mare Imbrium) and highlands (Apennine Mountains, a
ring of the Imbrium basin); rocks are breccia and basalt.
Highlands (Descartes formation and Cayley Plains);
rocks are anorthosite and highlands soil.
Mare (Sea of Serenity) and Highlands; rocks are
mare soil, orange soil, basaltic lava, anorthosite.

44

Teacher Page

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Apollo Landing Sites
Purpose
To learn about the locations and geology of the six
Apollo landing sites.

Key Words

Procedure

latitude

1. Look at a map of the Moon showing the Apollo
landing sites. Fill in the “Apollo Landing
Sites Chart.”

longitude
mare
highlands

2. Find the landing sites on a globe of the Moon.

Sea of Tranquillity

3. How do latitude and longitude compare on
Earth and on the Moon?

Ocean of Storms
Fra Mauro
Hadley-Appenine
Descartes
Sea of Serenity
Taurus-Littrow

4. Compare and contrast the six Apollo landing sites.
(Think about who, when, where, and geology for
your answer.)

Materials
lunar maps with latitude
and longitude grid
“Apollo Landing Sites
Chart”
Moon globe

5. Which site would you most like to visit? Why?

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

45

Apollo Mission

Landing Date

Latitude

Major Geologic Features and Rock Types

Apollo Landing Sites Chart
Longitude

46

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

50

Teacher Page

Regolith Formation
Purpose
To compare the process of regolith formation on Earth
and on the Moon.

Background

[also see “Teacher's Guide” Pages 4, 5]

The loose, fragmental material on the Moon’s surface is called regolith. This regolith, a
product of meteoritic bombardment, is the debris thrown out of the impact craters.
The composition and texture of the lunar regolith varies from place to place depending on
the rock types impacted.
Generally, the older the surface, the thicker the regolith. The regolith on young maria
may be only 2 meters thick; whereas, it is perhaps 20 meters thick in the older lunar
highlands.
By contrast, regolith on Earth is a product of weathering. Weathering encompasses all
the processes that cause rocks to fragment, crack, crumble, or decay. These processes can
be physical (such as freezing water causing rocks to crack), chemical (such as decaying
of minerals in water or acids), and biological (such as plant roots widening cracks in
rocks).
The rock debris caused by weathering can then be loosened and carried away by erosional agents -- running water (fast-flowing rivers, rain, ocean waves), high-speed wind
(by itself or sandblasting), and ice (glaciers).
In this activity, procedures A and B challenge the students to determine the effects of
wind, sandblasting, and water on regolith formation and deposition on Earth. This is
followed by prodedure C in which the students simulate regolith formation on the Moon
by meteoritic bombardment.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet.
Toast, crackers, or brittle cookies can be used in this activity. Toast is the least expensive
but most time consuming choice. In any case, students will need two different colors of
materials for procedure C; for example, vanilla and chocolate graham crackers. Invariably, students get hungry at the sight of food, so you may want to reserve some clean
materials for consumption or use something other than a rock for the projectile.
To prepare bread: use a conventional oven, toaster, or sun-dry method to produce the
most crisp and brittle toast. Toast one loaf of white bread and one loaf of golden wheat or
rye bread. Note that whole wheat bread does not get brittle enough.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

47

Teacher Page

Regolith Formation
For procedure B, fill margarine containers (one for each group) with water and sand,
then freeze. The more sand, the better the illusion to a real rock.
For procedure C, do not use glass pans. Large plastic tubs are preferred for this procedure, but recyclable aluminum roasting pans or shallow cardboard boxes work as well.

In Class
Divide the students into cooperative groups and distribute materials.
Discuss the definition of regolith. Have students guess how regolith is formed on Earth
and on the Moon. Ask students for justification.
If sand paper or nail files are not available, then students can use the edge of a ruler to
illustrate the effects of sandblasting in procedure A. Caution students to use a collection
tray in the sink in procedure B to avoid sand-clogged drains. An alternative to using a
faucet is to have the students pour a steady stream of water from beakers onto their icecube rocks to illustrate the effects of falling water.
Have students guess individually, then discuss in groups, what the surface of the Moon
is like (hard rocks, fine dust, large boulders). Ask students for justification of their
answers.
Refer to a photograph of an astronaut’s bootprint on the surface of the Moon. Give
students the opportunity to change or confirm their guesses.
Procedure C is best done outside. Drop the rock from waist high. Sometimes the impacting rock causes the pan to bounce so you may want to secure the pan to the ground
with tape. Students should stand back as a safety precaution.

Wrap-up
After participating in the activity, have the whole class compare and contrast regolith
formation and ask each small group to verify their original guesses.

48

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Regolith Formation
Purpose
To compare and contrast the process of regolith
formation on Earth and on the Moon.

Key Words
regolith
meteoritic bombardment
weathering
erosion

Materials
toasted white bread
toasted golden wheat
bread

Regolith formation on Earth
Procedure A
What effect does wind have on
regolith formation?
1. Imagine that the piece of toasted bread is a rock on
Earth. Your hand is the wind. The sand paper is
wind carrying particles of sand.
2. Predict the effects of rubbing just your hand and
then the sand paper across the toasted bread.

small pan
sand paper, nail file, or
edge of ruler
ice cube with sand inside
tray
fist-size rock

3. Now try it. Rub your hand across the toasted
bread and observe the bread and the pieces which
fall from it onto the pan. Observations:

4. This time rub the sand paper across the toasted
bread and observe the bread and the pieces which
fall from it onto the pan. Observations:

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

49

Regolith Formation
5. How was the effect different?

6. How is this activity related to processes on Earth?

Procedure B
What effect does falling or fast flowing
water have on regolith formation?
1. Imagine that the ice cube with sand is a rock.
2. Place this ice cube on a collection tray beneath the water faucet.
3. Adjust the water flow from the faucet so a medium stream hits the
ice cube.
4. Observe what happens to the ice cube and the remaining particles.
5. What happened to the rock (ice cube)?

6. Describe the particles which remain.

50

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Regolith Formation
7. How does water contribute to regolith formation on Earth?

Regolith formation on the Moon
Procedure C
1. Do you think regolith on the Moon is formed in the same manner
as on Earth? Why or why not?

Now we will investigate the effects of meteoritic bombardment
on regolith formation.
2. In a small pan, place 2 slices of toasted white bread onto 3
slices of toasted golden wheat bread. This represents the
Moon’s crust.
3. Drop a rock onto the layers of toasted bread twice. Describe
the bread slices and the crumbs.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

51

Regolith Formation
4. Drop the rock 20 times onto the layers of toasted bread.
Describe the bread slices and the crumbs.

5. Which crumbs can be seen at the surface? Why?

6. How does the thickness of the crumb layers compare after 2 hits
and after 20 more hits?

7. How does meteoritic bombardment make regolith on the Moon?

52

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Lunar Surface
Purpose
To make a model of the Moon's surface and to consider the geologic processes and rocks of each area.

Background [also see “Teacher's Guide” Pages 2, 3, 4, 12, 13]
A variety of features are evident on the lunar surface. These features include craters
with and without rays (also see the “Impact Craters” activity on Page 61), crater
chains, maria, rilles, and mountains.
crater chains - in curved paths are probably incompletely formed rilles,
- in straight paths are probably from rocks thrown out during an impact
event and landing in a row.
rilles

- are long valleys crossing maria that formed as underground lava
channels which collapsed after the hot lava flowed away.

mountains

- almost all in the highlands are the rims of large craters,
- also occur in the centers of craters that are larger than 40 km diameter;
these mountains are called central uplifts,
- also occur as low, circular, rounded hills called domes.

In this activity students will use clay, plaster of Paris, or playdough to construct model
surfaces to match what they see on maps and photographs of the Moon. They “flag”
Apollo landing sites and consider the collection site of each Lunar Disk sample.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet.
Obtain one or more lunar maps. Students can either be assigned to or given a choice of
specific areas to model. Using maps of both the nearside (Earth-facing side) and farside
of the Moon will give more variety of surface features.
Collect trays or shallow cardboard boxes and modeling material (recipes for playdough
appear on Page 78). Assemble sculpturing tools such as wooden sticks, plastic knives,
rolling pins, etc.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

53

Teacher Page

Lunar Surface
It is beneficial to do “The Lunar Disk” activity (on Page 39) first so students can relate
the samples to their model surfaces.

In Class
Consider having cooperative teams build one model surface. Each team is responsible for
describing the surface features, explaining the geology, and listing the typical rock types of
the area. Either draw an outline around each area on a Moon map or if you have an extra
map, cut the map into sections. The whole map is finally recreated by putting the model
surfaces back together.
Have the students use toothpick flags to label Apollo landing sites.

Wrap-up
Review the variety of surface features found on the Moon. Are some features more common than others?
What are the most common terrains on the Moon? Do these terrains exist on the nearside,
farside, or globally?
Review the processes that made the various surface features. Also see the “Impact Craters” activity on Page 61 and the “Clay Lava Flows” activity on page 71.
What kinds of rocks are found in the areas modeled by the students? Also see the
“Apollo Landing Sites” activity on page 43 and the literature which accompanies the
Lunar Sample Disk.
If the student teams made models of different sections of a large map, then did the
modeled surface features match from tray to adjacent tray? Have the students discuss
why or why not.

54

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Lunar Surface
Purpose
To make a model of the Moon's surface and to consider the geologic processes and rocks of each area.

Key Words

Procedure

crater

1. Observe the Moon using binoculars or a
telescope. What surface features can you see?

mountain
rille
mare
crater chain
ray
terrain

Materials
binoculars or telescope
lunar map
photographs of the Moon

2. Look at a map and photographs of the Moon.
List the many different features you see.

clay, plaster of Paris, or
playdough
tray
sculpturing tools
toothpick flags
Lunar Sample Disk

3. Prepare a model lunar surface by placing a thin,
even layer of modeling material on a tray.
4. Use sculpturing tools to form the features that
you see on the Moon's surface.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

55

Lunar Surface
5. How do you think these surface features were created on the
Moon? List at least one idea for each kind of feature.

11

6. If your model surface has an Apollo landing site, then label it
with a toothpick flag.
7. What kinds of rocks occur in your area? If your area has an
Apollo landing site, then include the names of samples from the
Lunar Sample Disk in your answer.

8. Compare your model surface with your classmates' surfaces. Can
you match features from one area to another? Why or why not?

56

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Differentiation
Purpose
To see how minerals separate from each other in a
magma ocean.

Background [also see “Teacher’s Guide” Page 12]
When planets begin to melt, the materials in them begin to separate from one another.
The heaviest materials, such as metallic iron, sink to form cores. Low density magmas rise forming crusts. This process is called differentiation.
Soon after formation, the Moon melted substantially forming a large body of magma
that completely surrounded it. This is called the lunar magma ocean. The main
evidence that this actually happened on the Moon is the presence of large amounts of
the mineral plagioclase feldspar in the ancient, lunar highlands crust. Scientists
surmise feldspar floated in the magma ocean and accumulated at the top, while denser
minerals such as olivine and pyroxene sank and accumulated at the base of the magma
ocean.
This same process happens in lava lakes and in magma chambers beneath volcanoes
on Earth. Minerals denser than the melt sink; those less dense float. It is an important
geological process that leads to the production of a wide variety of igneous rocks.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet. Students will simulate the
process of differentiation using readily-available materials: water, a transparent container (1000-milliliter beakers are good because they look scientific, but any widemouthed glass will work), pennies or metal shot, sand, and toothpicks.

In Class
Take a handful of pennies, sand, and toothpicks and dump them into the water. The
pennies (or metal shot) sink faster than the sand. The toothpicks float. The floating
toothpicks lie at a variety of angles and are analogous to the feldspar that formed the
initial lunar crust. There ought to be more pennies than sand on the very bottom, with
sand on top of that pile. (The pennies are much denser, 8.9 grams per cubic centimeter,
than the sand, about 2.6 grams per cubic centimeter, so the pennies sink faster.) The
clear water in between represents still-molten magma.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

57

Teacher Page

Differentiation
This activity can be done as a demonstration if you prefer.

Wrap-up
Relate the sinking and floating objects to the differentiation of the Moon's
magma ocean.

58

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Differentiation
Purpose
To see how minerals separate from each other in a
magma ocean.

Key Words

Procedure

differentiation

1. Mix the pennies, sand, and toothpicks in
the bowl.

density
magma ocean

Materials
pennies
sand

2. Fill the container with water to about 2 cm
from the top.
3. Predict what will happen when you drop a handful of the pennies-sand-toothpicks mixture into the
water. Will they all sink to the bottom? Will some
sink faster than others?

toothpicks
bowl
transparent container
water

4. Now drop the mixture into the water. Wait until
the objects stop moving and look at the deposits.
What do you see?

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

59

Differentiation
5. Can you explain what causes the differences in the way the
objects sink or float?

6. Suppose the mineral feldspar in the lunar magma ocean
responded like the toothpicks in the water. What does this tell
you about the formation of the original crust on the Moon?

7. What makes up the highlands of the Moon? Based on this
experiment, does this make sense?

60

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Impact Craters
Purpose
To determine the factors affecting the appearance of
impact craters and ejecta.

Background

[also see “Teacher's Guide” Pages 1, 2, photo on 8,
12, and photo on 13]

The circular features so obvious on the Moon’s surface are impact craters formed
when impactors smashed into the surface. The explosion and excavation of materials at
the impacted site created piles of rock (called ejecta) around the circular hole as well as
bright streaks of target material (called rays) thrown for great distances.
Two basic methods forming craters in nature are:
1) impact of a projectile on the surface and 2) collapse of the top of a volcano creating
a crater termed caldera. By studying all types of craters on Earth and by creating impact
craters in experimental laboratories geologists concluded that the Moon's craters are
impact in origin.
The factors affecting the appearance of impact craters and ejecta are the size and velocity
of the impactor, and the geology of the target surface.
By recording the number, size, and extent of erosion of craters, lunar geologists can
determine the ages of different surface units on the Moon and can piece together the
geologic history. This technique works because older surfaces are exposed to impacting
meteorites for a longer period of time than are younger surfaces.
Impact craters are not unique to the Moon. They are found on all the terrestrial planets
and on many moons of the outer planets.
On Earth, impact craters are not as easily recognized because of weathering and erosion.
Famous impact craters on Earth are Meteor Crater in Arizona, U.S.A.; Manicouagan in
Quebec, Canada; Sudbury in Ontario, Canada; Ries Crater in Germany, and Chicxulub on
the Yucatan coast in Mexico. Chicxulub is considered by most scientists as the source
crater of the catastrophe that led to the extinction of the dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous period. An interesting fact about the Chicxulub crater is that you cannot see it. Its
circular structure is nearly a kilometer below the surface and was originally identified
from magnetic and gravity data.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

61

Teacher Page

Impact Craters
Aristarchus

Typical characteristics of a lunar impact crater are labeled on this photograph of
Aristarchus, 42 km in diameter, located West of Mare Imbrium.

wall
floor
rays

ejecta

central
uplifts

raised
rim

raised rim - rock thrown out of the crater and deposited as a ring-shaped pile of debris at the crater’s
edge during the explosion and excavcation of an impact event.

floor

- bowl shaped or flat, characteristically below surrounding ground level unless filled in with lava.

central
uplifts

- mountains formed because of the huge increase and rapid decrease in pressure during the
impact event. They occur only in the center of craters that are larger than 40 km diameter.
See Tycho crater for another example.

walls

- characteristically steep and may have giant stairs called terraces.

ejecta

- blanket of material surrounding the crater that was excavated during the impact event. Ejecta
becomes thinner away from the crater.

rays

62

- bright streaks starting from a crater and extending away for great distances. See Copernicus
crater for another example.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Impact Craters
Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet.
In this activity, marbles or other spheres such as steel shot, ball bearings, golf, or wooden
balls are used as impactors dropped from a series of heights onto a prepared “lunar surface.” Using impactors of different mass dropped from the same height will allow students to study the relationship of mass of the impactor to crater size. Dropping impactors
from different heights will allow students to study the realtionship of velocity of the
impactor to crater size.

The following materials work well as a base for the “lunar surface” topped with a dusting of dry tempera paint or other material in a contrasting color:
all purpose flour

- Reusable in this activity and keeps well in a covered container.

baking soda

- It can be recycled for use in the lava layer activity or for many
other science activities. Reusable in this activity, even if colored, by adding a clean layer of new white baking soda on
top. Keeps indefinitely in a covered container. Baking soda
mixed (1:1) with table salt also works.

corn meal

- Reusable in this activity but probably not recyclable. Keeps
only in freezer in airtight container.

sand and
corn starch

- Mixed (1:1), sand must be very dry. Keeps only in freezer in
airtight container.

dry tempera paint
or powdered drink
mixes or glitter

- Sift on top; use a sieve, screen, or flour sifter. A contrasting
color to the base materials gives striking results.

Pans should be plastic, aluminum, or cardboard. Do not use glass. They should be at
least 7.5 cm deep. Basic 10"x12" aluminum pans or plastic tubs work fine, but the
larger the better to avoid misses. Also, a larger pan may allow students to drop more
marbles before having to resurface the target materials.
A reproducible student “Data Chart” is included; students will need a separate chart for
each impactor used in the activity.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

63

Teacher Page

Impact Craters

In Class
1. Begin by looking at craters in photographs of the Moon and asking students their
ideas of how craters formed.
2. During this activity, the flour, baking soda, or dry paint may fall onto the floor and
the baking soda may even be disbursed into the air. Spread newspapers under the
pan(s) to catch spills or consider doing the activity outside. Under supervision,
students have successfully dropped marbles from second-story balconies. Resurface
the pan before a high drop.
3. Have the students agree beforehand on the method they will use to “smooth” and
resurface the material in the pan between impacts. The material need not be packed
down. Shaking or tilting the pan back and forth produces a smooth surface. Then
be sure to reapply a fresh dusting of dry tempera paint or other material. Remind
students that better experimental control is achieved with consistent handling of the
materials. For instance, cratering results may vary if the material is packed down for
some trials and not for others.
4. Allow some practice time for dropping marbles and resurfacing the materials in the
pan before actually recording data.
5. Because of the low velocity of the marbles compared with the velocity of real
impactors, the experimental impact craters may not have raised rims. Central uplifts
and terraced walls will be absent.
6. The higher the drop height, the greater the velocity of the marble, so a larger crater
will be made and the ejecta will spread out farther.
7. If the impactor were dropped from 6 meters, then the crater would be larger. The
students need to extrapolate the graph out far enough to read the predicted crater
diameter.

Wrap-Up
Have the class compare and contrast their hypotheses on what things affect the appearance of craters and ejecta.

64

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Impact Craters
Extensions
1. As a grand finale for your students, demonstrate a more forceful impact using a
slingshot.
2. What would happen if you change the angle of impact? How could this be tested?
Try it! Do the results support your hypothesis?
If the angle of impact is changed, then the rays will be concentrated and longer in
the direction of impact. A more horizontal impact angle produces a more skewed
crater shape.
3. To focus attention on the rays produced during an impact, place a paper bulls-eye
target with a central hole on top of a large, flour-filled pan. Students drop a marble
through the hole to measure ray lengths and orientations.
4. Use plaster of Paris or wet sand instead of dry materials.
5. Videotape the activity.
6. Some people think the extinction of the dinosaurs was caused by massive global
climate changes because of a meteorite impact on Earth. Summarize the exciting
work that has been done at Chicxulub on the Yucatan coast of Mexico.
7. Some people think Earth was hit by an object the size of Mars that caused a large
part of Earth to “splash” into space, forming the Moon. Do you agree or disagree?
Explain your answer.
8. Physics students could calculate the velocities of the impactors from various heights.
(Answers from heights of 30 cm, 60 cm, 90 cm, and 2 m should, of course, agree with
the velocity values shown on the “Impact Craters - Data Chart”.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

65

Name:

impactor #

Date:

gm

Impact Craters - Data Chart
trial 1

trial 2

trial 3

total

average

crater
diameter
crater
depth
average
length of
all rays
crater
diameter
crater
depth
average
length of
all rays
crater
diameter
crater
depth
average
length of
all rays
crater
diameter
crater
depth
average
length of
all rays

66

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Impact Craters
Purpose
To determine the factors affecting the appearance of
impact craters and ejecta.

Key Words

Procedure

impact

Making an hypothesis

impactor
ejecta

1. After looking at photographs of the Moon, how do
you think the craters were formed?

Materials
1 pan
“lunar” surface material
tempera paint, dry
sieve or sifter
balance

2. What do you think are factors that affect the
appearance and size of craters and ejecta?

3 impactors (marbles or
other spheres)
meter stick
ruler, plastic with middle
depression
protractor
“Data Chart” for each
impactor
graph paper

Preparing a “lunar” test surface
1. Fill a pan with surface material to a depth of
about 2.5 cm. Smooth the surface, then tap the
pan to make the materials settle evenly.
2. Sprinkle a fine layer of dry tempera paint
evenly and completely over the surface. Use a
sieve or sifter for more uniform layering.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

67

Impact Craters
3. What does this “lunar” surface look like before testing?

Cratering Process
1. Use the balance to measure the mass of each impactor. Record
the mass on the “Data Chart” for this impactor.
2. Drop impactor #1 from a height of 30 cm onto the prepared surface.
3. Measure the diameter and depth of the resulting crater.
4. Note the presence of ejecta (rays). Count the rays, measure, and
determine the average length of all the rays.
5. Record measurements and any other observations you have about
the appearance of the crater on the Data Chart.
Make three trials and compute the average values.
6. Repeat steps 2 through 5 for impactor #1, increasing the drop
heights to 60 cm, 90 cm, and 2 meters. Complete the Data Chart
for this impactor. Note that the higher the drop height, the faster
the impactor hits the surface.
7. Now repeat steps 1 through 6 for two more impactors. Use a
separate Data Chart for each impactor.
8. Graph your results.
Graph #1: Average crater diameter vs. impactor height or velocity.
Graph #2: Average ejecta (ray) length vs. impactor height or
velocity.
Note: on the graphs, use different symbols (e.g., dot, triangle,
plus, etc.) for different impactors.

68

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Impact Craters
Results
1. Is your hypothesis about what affects the appearance and size of
craters supported by test data? Explain why or why not.

2. What do the data reveal about the relationship between crater
size and velocity of impactor?

3. What do the data reveal about the relationship between ejecta
(ray) length and velocity of impactor?

4. If the impactor were dropped from 6 meters, would the crater be
larger or smaller? How much larger or smaller?
(Note: the velocity of the impactor would be 1,084 cm/s.)
Explain your answer.

5. Based on the experimental data, describe the appearance of an
impact crater.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

69

Impact Craters
6. The size of a crater made during an impact depends not only on
the mass and velocity of the impactor, but also on the amount
of kinetic energy possessed by the impacting object. Kinetic
energy, energy in motion, is described as:
KE = 1/2(mv2)
where, m = mass and v = velocity.
During impact, the kinetic energy of an asteroid is transferred
to the target surface, breaking up rock and moving the particles
around.
7. How does the kinetic energy of an impacting object relate to
crater diameter?

8. Looking at the results in your Data Tables, which is the most
imporant factor controlling the kinetic energy of a projectile, its
diameter, its mass, or its velocity?

9. Does this make sense? How do your results compare to the
kinetic energy equation?

10. Try plotting crater diameter vs. kinetic energy as Graph #3.
The product of mass (in gm) and velocity (in cm/s) squared is a
new unit called “erg.”

70

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Clay Lava Flows
Purpose
To understand some of the geological processes and
the structures that form as lava flows across planetary
landscapes by using mud as an analog for lava.

Background

[also see “Teacher's Guide” Pages 3, 4, 12, 13]

In this activity students will use mud to simulate surface lava flows. The experiment
demonstrates many of the key features of a’a flows, though not of whole pahoehoe
flow fields, which are fed by lava tubes.
Real a’a lava flows are complicated. They are characterized by a prominent lava channel confined between levees. Shear zones, places where one portion of the flow is
moving faster than an adjacent portion, usually occur. Small flows of pahoehoe lava
also become channelized, but on a much smaller scale than a’a flows.
As mud is poured onto an inclined surface, the first and foremost thing to do is to observe the formation of distinct features in the flow. Levees form on the outer part of the
flow. These are not quite the same as levees on lava flows because the latter build up
levees by overflowing the banks, but nevertheless, mud flows do form levees. Inside
the levees the mud moves downhill. Ridges might develop in the flowing portions,
analogous to large ridges in lava flows. The thickness of the flow varies with slope,
time, position in the flow, and amount of mud poured. These variables can be tested by
measuring width and thickness as functions of time, as described in the procedure.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet.
Mix clay and water in a bucket: 5 pounds of wet clay with 4 cups of water. To mix easily,
break clay into half-inch pieces and allow to dry. The mixing process should be started
at least 2 days before you intend to use the clay. Cover the bucket to keep the clay
mixture from hardening.
The final clay-water mixture should be fairly uniform, with only a few lumps. Smooth the
mixture with a wire whisk to the consistency of thick cream. If the mixture is too
runny, then it will pour like water. If it is too thick, then it will mound up (though that
is interesting and somewhat resembles some very viscous lava flows).
Plexiglas is an excellent surface to use for the experiment, though any nonporous surface will do fine, such as a wooden drawing board covered with plastic wrap. If the
surface is too porous, then the mud loses moisture to it, changing flow characteristics.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

71

Teacher Page

Clay Lava Flows
Draw a grid with 10 cm spacing onto the Plexiglas using a permanent marker pen. Or
draw a grid onto paper taped to the wooden board, then cover with plastic wrap.

In Class
Using a protractor and plumb line, the Plexiglas is propped up to an angle of 15o for
the procedure, then to an angle of 25o for a repeat of the procedure.
Students should pour the clay slowly and at a constant rate down the inclined Plexiglas.
The bucket should be held about 10 cm from the high end of the Plexiglas.
At each 10 cm mark, the students will:
1. record the time the flow front passes the mark,
2. measure the length of the flow,
3. measure the width of the flow,
4. measure the center depth of the flow.
“Data Tables” are provided for recording these values. Space is provided for sketches
of the flow outline.
When the clay is flowing down the Plexiglas, look for areas near the edges where the flow
rate is low or zero; these are the levees of the channel. The part in the middle that is
moving faster is called the channel interior.

Wrap-up
How do the two flows compare?
Is the ratio of channel width to flow width the same?
Presumably the clay volumes were the same for both slopes, but the flow areas could be
determined and multiplied by the average depths as an exercise just to check.

Extensions
1. Use a ruler with a grid to slice into the flow at each 10 cm mark to get cross sections.
2. Can you see the levee margins in the cross sections?
3. How do the cross sections change down the length of the flow?
4. Videotape the activity.
5. Use this clay in the “Impact Craters” activity on Page 61.

72

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Clay Lava Flows
Purpose
To understand some of the geological processes and
the structures that form as lava flows across planetary
landscapes by using mud as an analog for lava.

Key Words

Procedure

lava flows

1. Stir your mixture of clay and water in the
bucket. A few lumps are acceptable.

channels and levees
pressure ridges

Materials
clay mixture
bucket, preferably with
pouring spout
wire whisk
large spatula
Plexiglas or other nonporous surface (~1/2 by 1
meter, and preferably with
a grid)
protractor with plumb line

2. Prop up one end of the Plexiglas at an angle of
about 15° (use the protractor and plumb line
to determine the angle). A board under the Plexiglas
helps prevent sagging.
3. Hold the bucket of clay mixture about 10 cm
downslope from the high end of the Plexiglas.
Keep the bucket about 10 cm above the Plexiglas
surface. Pour the clay slowly. It is important to
keep the pour rate as constant as possible. Start
the stopwatch when the flow front passes the
zero line.
4. Watch the flow as it goes downhill and spreads
out, and record the time it reaches each 10 cm
mark. How far behind the flow front does the
distinct channel become apparent?

stopwatch
“DataTables”
tape measure or ruler

5. Record the time when you stopped pouring (the
flow will continue to move). Fill in the “Data
Tables.”
6. Note the channel and levees as well as shear zones
within the levees. Does the channel extend the
entire length of the flow?

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

73

ClayLava
LavaFlows
Flows
Clay
7. Using the tape measure, measure the length, width, and
center depth of the flow and the channel width at each 10 cm
mark. Fill in the “Data Tables.”
8. Draw the outline of the flow using the grid as a guide.
9. Now prop the Plexiglas up higher to an angle of about 25° and
repeat the procedure. The clay may flow off the end of the ramp
onto the flat underlying surface. How do the structures in this
flat part compare to those on the slope?

10. Repeat all the measurements and fill in the “Data Tables.”
11. How do the two experimental flows compare? Is the ratio of
channel width to flow width the same?

74

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Clay Lava Flows
Data Tables

Angle

Time
at 0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Time
stopped
pouring

Width
at 0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Total
length

15o
25o

Angle

15o
25o

Angle

Centerline depth
at 0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Channel
width
at 0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

15o
25o

Angle

15o
25o

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

75

ClayLava
LavaFlows
Flows
Clay

Sketch of
flow at 15°

Sketch of
flow at 25°

76

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Lava Layering
Purpose
To learn about the stratigraphy of lava flows produced
by multiple eruptions.

Background [also see “Teacher's Guide” Pages 3, 4, 12, 13]
Dark, flat maria (layers of basaltic lava flows) cover about 16 percent of the Moon’s
total surface. They are easily seen on a full Moon with the naked eye on clear nights from
most backyards. The maria, quite similar to Earth’s basalts, generally flowed long distances utlimately flooding low-lying areas such as impact basins. Yet, the eruption
sources for most of the lunar lava flows are difficult to identify. The difficulty in
finding source areas results from burial by younger flows and/or erosion from meteoritic bombardment.
Generally, the overall slope of the surface, local topographic relief (small cliffs and
depressions), and eruption direction influence the path of lava flows. Detailed maps of
the geology of the Moon from photographs reveal areas of complicated lava layering.
The study of rock layering is called stratigraphy.
On the Moon, older flows become covered by younger flows and/or become more
pocked with impact craters.
On Earth, older lava flows tend to be more weathered (broken) and may have more
vegetation than younger flows. Field geologists use differences in roughness, color, and
chemistry to further differentiate between lava flows. They also follow the flow margins, channels, and levees to try to trace lava flows back to the source area.

The focus of this activity is on the patterns of lava flows produced by multiple eruptions. We use a short cup to hold the baking soda because we are looking at the flows
and not at constructing a volcano model. Volcanoes, like those so familiar to us on
Earth and Mars, are not present on the Moon. Three well-known areas on the Moon
interpreted as important volcanic complexes are: Aristarchus plateau, and the Marius
Hills and Rumker Hills (both located in Oceanus Procellarum). These areas are characterized by sinuous rilles (interpreted as former lava channels and/or collapsed lava tubes)
and numerous domes.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

77

Teacher Page

Lava Layering
Preparation
Baking soda-vinegar solutions and playdough are used to model the basaltic lavas.
Different colors identify different eruption events; this activity calls for 4 colors.
Students will be asked to observe where the flows traveled and to interpret the stratigraphy. Cover the work area and be prepared for spills.
Play Dough (stove-top recipe)
-best texture and lasts for months when refrigerated in an air tight container.
2 cups flour
1/3 cup oil, scant
1 cup salt
2 cups cold water
4 teaspoons cream of tarter food colorings (20 drops more or less)
Make this large batch one color or divide ingredients in half to make 2 colors. You will need 4 colors
total. Combine ingredients and cook mixture in a large sauce pan, stirring constantly, until the dough
forms a ball. Turn dough out onto a floured surface to cool. Then kneed until smooth and elastic. Cool
completely; refrigerate in air tight containers.

Play Dough (no-cooking recipe)
2 cups flour
1 cup salt
6 teaspoons alum or cream of tartar

2 Tablespoons oil
1 cup cold water
food colorings (as above)

Make this large batch one color or divide ingredients in half to make 2 colors. You will need 4 colors
total. Mix ingredients and kneed until smooth and elastic. Store in air tight containers.

In Class
This activity can be done individually or in cooperative teams.
Making a vertical cut through the flows reveals, quite dramatically, the stratigraphy of the
section.

Wrap-up
Have students compare their layered lava patterns with their classmates' patterns. Did
they recognize individual flows by color and outline? Point out how the oldest flow is
on the bottom of the stack and the youngest flow is on top.

Extensions
Groups can trade landscapes before answering the questions. Clear, plastic drinking
straws can be pushed down into the landscapes to extract “drill” samples of the layers.

78

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Lava Layering
Purpose
To learn about the stratigraphy of lava flows produced
by multiple eruptions.

Key Words

Procedure

eruption

1. Take one paper cup that has been cut to a height
of 2.5 cm and secure it onto the tray. (You may
use a small loop of tape on the outside bottom of
the cup.) This short cup is your eruption source
and the tray is the original land surface.

source
stratigraphy

Materials
paper cups, 4 oz. size,
some cut down to a
height of 2.5 cm
cafeteria tray or cookie
sheet, 1 for each eruption
source
tape
tablespoon
baking soda
measuring cup
vinegar
food coloring, 4 colors;
for example, red, yellow,
blue, green
playdough or clay in the
same 4 colors as the
food coloring
plastic knife, string, or
dental floss: to slice
through the layers of
playdough

2. Place one Tablespoon of baking soda in this
cup.
3. Fill 4 tall paper cups each with 1/8 cup of
vinegar.
4. To each paper cup of vinegar add 3 drops of food
coloring; make each cup a different color.
Set them aside.
5. Set aside small balls of playdough, one of each
color.
6. You are now ready to create an eruption.
Pour red-colored vinegar into your source cup and
watch the eruption of “lava.”
7. As best you can, use red playdough to cover the
areas where red “lava” flowed.
8. Repeat steps 6 and 7 for each color of vinegar and
playdough. You may add fresh baking soda to the
source cup or spoon out excess vinegar from the
source cup as needed.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

79

Lava Layering
Results
1. After your four eruptions, can you still see the original land
surface (tray)? Where?

2. Describe what you see and include observations of flows covering or overlapping other flows. Use the left page margin to
make a sketch.

3. Where is the oldest flow?
4. Where is the youngest flow?
5. Did the flows always follow the same path? (be specific)

6. What do you think influences the path direction of lava flows?

7. If you had not watched the eruptions, how would you know that
there are many different layers of lava? Give at least 2 reasons:

80

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Lava Layering
8. Which of the reasons listed in answer 7 could be used to identify
real lava layers on Earth?

9. What are other ways to distinguish between older and younger
layered lava flows on Earth?

10. Which of the reasons listed in answer 9 could be used to
identify lava layers on the Moon?

11. What are other ways to distinguish between older and younger
layered lava flows on the Moon?

12. Make a vertical cut through an area of overlapping playdough
“lava” layers. Draw what you see in the vertical section. Color
your sketch and add these labels:
oldest flow, youngest flow.

Vertical
section
through
the flows

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

81

Lava Layering

82

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Lunar Landing Sites
Purpose
To design a spacecraft for travel to and from the Moon
and choose an interesting lunar landing site.

Background [also see “Teacher's Guide” Pages 2-5]
The previous Unit 2 activities introduce the Moon's rocks, surface features, and the
geologic processes that formed them. With this background, students are given the
challenge to plan a mission to the Moon. In this activity, teams of students design a
spacecraft, choose a suitable lunar landing site, and present their ideas before the entire
class. Final presentations should include speeches and visual aides such as maps, diagrams, and 3-dimensional models.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet. Schedule library time as
needed.

In Class
Lead a discussion on what the students need to know about the Moon in general and
about potential landing sites before landing. A review of the Apollo sites may help
initiate a discussion.
After presenting the scenario and tasks to the class, form cooperative teams of 3-4
students. Each student will have assigned duties, as described on the reproducible
“Team Duty Sheet.”
For the presentations, either 3-D models or poster-size diagrams can be made,
depending on resources and time. Any one or all team members may participate in
the presentations.
Scenario: NASA has given you the assignment to develop a spacecraft that can
fly people safely to the Moon, land, and return to Earth. You must select a
safe yet interesting lunar landing site for the spacecraft.
Size, mass, propulsion, number of crew, life support systems, and methods of takeoff and landing should be considered for the spacecraft.
Geology, terrain, safety, and length of stay should be considered for the
lunar landing site.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

83

Teacher Page

Lunar Landing Sites
Wrap-up
1. How do the sites chosen by the class compare in location and geologic diversity with
the Apollo sites?
2. What made some spacecraft designs and landing sites, in this activity, more risky than
others?
3. Are these lunar landing sites good for short-term visits only, or could the sites be
appropriate for lunar base development?
See the “Lunar Land Use” activity on Page 101.

Extensions
Spacecraft design could be conducted as a spin-off of the "egg drop" contest. Each
spacecraft is constructed to hold and protect one raw egg. The egg must remain
unbroken after landing from a high drop (perhaps a second-story balcony).
Some students may enjoy learning more details of Apollo site selections.
A detailed discussion of how the sites were chosen is given in To A Rocky Moon by
Don E. Wilhelms, Univ. of Arizona Press, 1993.
Use these lunar landing sites in the “Lunar Roving Vehicle” activity on Page 87,
stipulating that the vehicle must be able to work on the terrains.
Use these lunar sites in the “Lunar Land Use” activity on Page 101.

84

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Lunar Landing Sites
Purpose
To design a spacecraft for travel to and from the
Moon and chose an interesting lunar landing site.

Materials

Scenario

Moon maps

NASA has given you the assignment to develop a
spacecraft that can fly people safely to the Moon,
land, and return to Earth. You must also select a safe
yet interesting lunar landing site for the spacecraft.

Apollo landing sites map
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
Moon slides
background literature,
such as the “Teacher’s
Guide”
“Team Duty Sheet”
art and construction
supplies

Size, weight, propulsion, number of crew, life support systems, and methods of takeoff and landing
should be considered for the spacecraft. Geology,
terrain, safety, and length of stay should be considered for the lunar landing site.

Procedure
1. Read the “Team Duty Sheet” given to your team.
2. Design a spacecraft with all necessary sytems that
can go to the Moon, land, and return to Earth.
Build a model or draw a detailed diagram of the
design.
3. Study maps of the lunar sufrace and use your
knowledge of the Moon to determine a safe
yet interesting lunar landing site.
4. Make a presentation to the class:
(a) about your spacecraft and its special features
using diagrams and/or a model,
(b) describing, locating, and justifing the landing
site.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

85

Names:
Date:

Lunar Landing Sites
TEAM

DUTY

SHEET

Your team must design a spacecraft and determine a safe yet interesting
place to land on the Moon.

Everyone on your team should be assigned one or more of the following duties:

Chief Engineer : oversees the entire project, helps to design spacecraft, makes
critical decisions for the team.
Scientist :

designs spacecraft, oversees the construction of the model or
diagrams of the spacecraft.

Lunar Geologist : studies maps of the Moon and oversees the selection of a
safe yet interesting place to land the spacecraft.
Public Relations helps scientist and geologist, oversees the presentation of the
Manager :
spacecraft and landing site before the class.

86

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Lunar Roving Vehicle
Purpose
To construct a model of a lunar roving vehicle.

Background
The Apollo lunar roving vehicle was a battery-powered space buggy. The astronauts on Apollo 15, 16, and 17 used it to explore their landing sites and to travel greater
distances than astronauts on earlier missions. The lunar rover neatly folded up inside the
lunar lander during trips to the Moon. Once on the Moon's surface, it unfolded with the
help of springs. The lunar rover carried two astronauts and was manually driven. It was
designed to climb steep slopes, to go over rocks, and to move easily over the Moon's
regolith. It was able to carry more than twice its own weight in passengers, scientific
instruments, rocks, and regolith samples. The wheels on the rover were made of wire
mesh (piano wire) with titanium cleats for treads. Engineers did not use solid or air-filled
rubber tires because they would have been much heavier than were the wire mesh wheels.
The Apollo spacecraft had a fixed amount of mass (payload) it could deliver to the
surface, including the rover, rover batteries, scientific instruments, sample collection devices, etc. Hence, the wire-mesh wheels were important to the overall payload mass. This
rover was not designed for prolonged use, and it is uncertain if future lunar explorers
would use similar designs and materials for their vehicles, use new, more durable components, or turn to robotic rovers.
If students are interested in constructing models that actually move, then refer to Page 38
for more information on rocket and model building.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet. While commercial building sets
are very popular, models can be built with more simple and recyclable materials such as
cardboard boxes, tubes, cans, straws, construction paper, string, tape, pins, styrofoam
trays, thread spools, balloons, rubber bands, and mouse traps (for propulsion).

In Class / Wrap Up
After construction, students should name their vehicles and write a description of the
capabilities and special features.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

87

Teacher Page

Lunar Roving Vehicle
Extensions
Hold competitions between student vehicles with these criteria for judging:
1. Can the vehicle actually move -- by gravity; by some kind of propulsion system?
2. Can the vehicle go over different surfaces -- smooth, flat, bumpy, or inclined?
3. Is the vehicle sturdy?
4. Can the vehicle carry a heavy load? Have the students decide the weight of the load.
5. Could the vehicle withstand meteoritic bombardment?
6. Would the vehicle work on the Moon?
Discuss the pros and cons of manually driven vehicles versus remote-controlled robotic
rovers on the Moon.

Diagram of the vehicle used by Apollo astronauts.

88

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Lunar Roving Vehicle
Purpose
To construct a model of a lunar roving vehicle.

Key Words

Procedure

antenna

1. Describe the similarities and differences between
the Apollo lunar roving vehicle and a typical
family vehicle.

console
tool carrier and storage
robot

Materials
diagram of Apollo lunar
roving vehicle

2. What was special about the rover's wheels? Why
weren't they made of rubber and filled with air?

“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
construction materials
such as cardboard
boxes, tubes, cans,
straws, construction
paper, string, tape, pins,
styrofoam trays, thread
spools, balloons, rubber
bands, mouse traps, etc.
tape measures
stop watches

3. Review the “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet.” Design
a new lunar roving vehicle. Important design
issues include size, weight, power supply, number
of passengers, controls, scientific instruments,
tools, and storage compartments. Use the space
provided on the next page to draw a picture of
your design. Label the parts.
4. Construct a model of the lunar rover based on
your design.
5. Give a name to the vehicle.
6. Write a descriptive essay about the special features
and capabilitites of the vehicle and how you
solved the design issues raised in Question 3.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

89

Lunar Roving Vehicle
Sketch of
my model

90

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Moon Anomalies
Purpose
To investigate and try to explain various lunar
anomalies.

Background [also see “Teacher’s Guide” Pages 4, 10]
In this activity teams of students present hypotheses that attempt to resolve four anomalies of the Moon. They will be expected to prepare written and oral presentations for
the entire class. Using a forum format, students will debate the merits of each
hypothesis, with no right or wrong answers.

The four anomalies are:
“Quakes or No Quakes, that is the Question”
“Where Have All the Volcanoes Gone?”
“Maria, Maria, Where For Art Thou?”
“Magnetic Field Forever?”
Some of these anomalies are more complicated than others. The class need not discuss
all the anomalies; the most straightforward are Quakes and Missing Volcanoes.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheets.
Schedule library time, if needed.

Some possible solutions to the anomalies
Quakes or No Quakes, that is the Question
The number and strength (magnitude) of moonquakes is much less than the number
and magnitude of earthquakes. The probable cause of this difference is the Moon's
smaller size and cooler interior. Earth is hot and active, manifested most dramatically in
plate tectonics. Tectonic plate motions in Earth are driven by convection in the
mantle—the solid mantle actually moves at rates of a few centimeters a year. The
Moon’s mantle, too cool to move easily, has no convection and no active tectonic plate
motions. Fewer movements inside the Moon mean fewer quakes. The few moonquakes that do occur are driven primarily by gravitational tugs by Earth and Sun (tides
in the solid Moon).
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

91

Teacher Page

Moon Anomalies
Where Have All the Volcanoes Gone?
The Moon has lots of lava flows, but no (or at least few) volcanoes. The clue to
solving this dilemma lies in understanding why volcanoes form on Earth, Mars, and
Venus. In fact, those bodies also have large expanses of lava flows that are not associated with volcanoes. For example, vast deposits of lavas occur in Oregon, Washington,
and Idaho. These are called the Columbia River Basalts. They erupted from long
cracks called fissures and flowed across the surface. The path the magma took was
far different from that in other places. The magma never concentrated to narrow conduits that were fed periodically over a long time to form a high mountain over the site.
The transport of magma for the Columbia River basalts was controlled by the stress
environment of the region. Long fissures developed which provided the magma with
pathways to the surface. On the Moon, plenty of fractures occur around the rings of the
multi-ringed basins. These fractures undoubtedly extend far into the Moon, and may
have provided easy access to the surface for magma, and at the same time did not allow
the magma paths to concentrate in one small area. Result: no large volcanoes formed.
The idea that some did form but were destroyed by impacts is always a possibility on the
Moon, but lots of volcano-sized mountains on basin rings survived, so one would expect
volcanoes to do so, too.
Maria, Maria, Where For Art Thou?
Almost all of the lunar maria decorate the Earth-facing side of the Moon. Only a few
add contrast to the farside. See the first two photographs in the “Teacher’s Guide” on
Page 1. The most likely cause of this asymmetry is the variation in thickness of the
Moon’s crust. The crust is lower in density than the mare-basalt magmas that must
pass through it to erupt onto the surface. This, in turn, requires that the magmas have a
sufficient driving pressure to migrate through the crust. Scientists think that magmas on
the Moon tend to stall and collect at the base of the crust. They stay there until the
pressure is enough to begin to form fissures for the magmas to travel through. On the
nearside, the crust is about 70 kilometers thick. Many of the mare-basalt magmas were
able to reach the surface once the pressure was large enough to form cracks. However,
on the farside, the crust is twice as thick, so very few magmas could reach the surface.
Most stalled on their way through it.
Magnetic Field Forever?
The lunar magnetic field is one of the least understood properties about the Moon. It
is about 10,000 times weaker than Earth’s magnetic field. The Moon had a weak field in
the past, but none is being generated at the present time.

92

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Moon Anomalies
The most likely reason for the decline in field strength is that the Moon’s tiny metallic
core (no larger than 400 kilometers in radius) did generate a field the way Earth’s core
does, but the field-generating engine kept losing power. Earth’s field is generated by
convective motions inside the liquid portion of the core: hotter iron rises, cooler iron
sinks, and the differential motions create a magnetic field. On the Moon, the whole
body cooled much faster than Earth (because the Moon is smaller), so the core also
cooled, and probably solidified. Motions fast enough to generate a magnetic field do
not occur today inside the Moon's core.

In Class
Divide the class into cooperative teams of 4-5 students. Encourage each team to generate
a team name and logo. Give each team a “Task Sheet” describing their duties. Each
team then develops a hypothesis that reconciles the dilemma given them. They must
work together to produce a written report describing their anomaly, hypothesis, and
supporting evidence. You may want to copy and distribute all the final reports so each
team has a complete set.
When the teams make their oral presentations to the class they must use visual aid materials, such as maps, posters, charts, slides, laserdiscs, etc. After each presentation, other
teams may challenge the presenters with questions or arguments.

Wrap-up
After all teams have presented, lead a discussion to summarize what has been learned.

Extension
You may wish to discuss another mysterious aspect of the Moon’s magnetic field: the
presence of several small areas (30-60 kilometers across) that have exceptionally large
surface magnetism, about 10 times the normal Moon magnetic field. These are associated
with bright swirly deposits. Possible origins include impact of a comet that is highly
magnetized or magnetization of a comet during impact. In either case, the magnetism is
transferred to the ejecta deposits at the site of impact. Another suggestion is that the
field results from giant, basin-forming impacts. It turns out that most, but not all, magnetic swirl deposits are on the exact opposite side of the Moon from a large basin (i.e.,
antipodal to the site of impact). The idea is that seismic waves generated by the large
impact interact vigorously when they meet half way around the Moon. Somehow these
interactions reinforce existing magnetic fields to create the anomaly. The whitish swirls,
by the way, may form because the solar wind (mostly hydrogen nuclei) is deflected by
the strong magnetic field. Thus, no hydrogen gets implanted into the regolith, and
subsequent micrometeorite bombardment does not cause formation of dark agglutinates. Instead of being dark glass, the agglutinates are colorless or nearly so.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

93

Names:
Date:

Moon Anomalies

Task Sheet
Everyone on your team should be assigned one or more of the following tasks:
Chief Stratigist :

oversees the entire project, works closely with all members,
makes critical decisions.

Material Person : collects, cares for, and returns all materials needed for
the activity.
Media
Consultant :

oversees development of all the visual aid materials that
your team will use during the presentation, such as maps,
posters, models, etc. Also coordinates the use of slides,
photographs, laserdisc, computer, etc.

Administrator :

keeps notes, assists media consultant, and prepares final
written report.

The oral presentation may be made by any one or all team members.

94

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Quakes or No Quakes,
that is the Question

Purpose
To investigate and try to explain why the Moon has
fewer moonquakes than Earth has earthquakes.

Key Words
earthquake
moonquake

Materials
maps of the Moon
background information on
the Moon
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”

Background
The Moon is safer than San Francisco—at least from
earthquake damage. Each year Earth has more than
10,000 earthquakes of magnitude 4 or greater. In
contrast, the Moon has less than 500, and most of
these are smaller than magnitude 2.5. The largest
moonquake recorded during the eight years that the
Apollo seismic instrument operated on the Moon was
slightly less than magnitude 5. On Earth, the largest
quakes reach magnitude 8, or even 9. Finally, the total
amount of energy released by moonquakes is the same
as released by three 100-watt light bulbs. Earthquakes
release the equivalent of 300,000,000 100-watt light
bulbs.

“Task Sheet”
art supplies

Dilemma
Why does the Moon have fewer quakes than Earth?
Is it because people live on Earth? Because the
Moon is smaller? Because Earth has moving tectonic
plates? Because the Moon has craters?

Task
Develop an hypothesis that explains why the Moon
has fewer quakes than Earth.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

95

Where Have All theVolcanoes Gone?

Purpose
To investigate and try to explain the absence of
volcanoes on the Moon.

Key Words

Background

volcano

The dark areas of the Moon’s surface, called the lunar
maria, are composed of solidified lava flows. Scientists know this from photographs that show the
margins of individual lava flows and from examination of rocks returned from the maria. The lava
plains cover 16% of the lunar surface and are up to
about 2 kilometers thick. This is a substantial
amount of lava. Scientists estimate that a total of 10
million cubic kilometers of lava erupted during a
period of about a billion years to fill the mare basins.
This is a lot of lava! -- enough to fill 10 billion football stadiums! Most of the maria occur inside the
huge circular impact craters called multi-ringed basins. The formation of these immense craters did not
cause the formation of the lava that made the maria,
but the basins did provide low areas into which the
liquid lava flowed.

lava flows
maria

Materials
maps of the Moon
background information
on the Moon
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
“Task Sheet”
art supplies

Dilemma
Ten million cubic kilometers of lava flowed across
the Moon’s surface, yet there are no obvious source
volcanoes. There are no mountains that rise dramatically as they do in Hawai'i or the Cascades of the
Pacific Northwest. If there are no volcanoes on the
Moon, then what is the source of the lava? Were the
volcanoes destroyed? Did the lava erupt in some
other way? What other ways could lava erupt?

Task
Develop an hypothesis that resolves the missing
volcanoes dilemma, without rejecting the idea that
the maria are composed of solidified lava flows.

96

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Maria, Maria, Where For Art Thou?

Purpose
To investigate and try to explain why the farside has
fewer maria than the nearside of the Moon.

Key Words
maria

Background

maps of the Moon

About 16% of the Earth-facing side of the Moon is
covered with dark maria. But less than 1% of the
farside is covered with maria. Scientists think that
the magmas were formed inside the Moon by melting of the Moon’s mantle, and that these magmas
then moved to the surface. They probably moved in
long cracks. Good evidence suggests that the crust
on the farside is about two times thicker than on the
nearside.

background information on
the Moon

Dilemma

crust
lava flows

Materials

“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
“Task Sheet”
art supplies

Assuming magma was generated throughout the
Moon’s mantle, why are almost all the maria on the
nearside of the Moon? Did they get covered up by
other rocks on the farside? Did Earth’s gravity help
them get out onto the nearside? Was it too hard to
travel through the thick, farside crust?

Task
Develop an hypothesis that resolves the maria-aremore-abundant-on-the-nearside dilemma.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

97

Magnetic Field Forever?

Purpose
To investigate and try to explain why the Moon has a
weaker magnetic field than does Earth.

Key Words

Background

magnetic field

The Moon has a much weaker magnetic field than
does Earth. However, the field was stronger in the
past, as shown by study of the magnetic properties
of lunar rocks. Earth's magnetic field is formed by
motions inside its iron core. The Moon also has a
core, but it is much smaller than Earth’s core. The
Moon’s core is no larger than 400 kilometers in
radius, and may be as small as 100 kilometers. In
contrast, Earth’s core is 2900 kilometers in radius.

core

Materials
background information
on the Moon
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
“Task Sheet”
art supplies

Dilemma
The Moon had a stronger magnetic field in the past
(billions of years ago), but it is weak now, much
weaker than Earth’s magnetic field. Why is it so
much weaker than Earth’s? Why was it stronger in
the past?

Task
Develop an hypothesis that explains why the Moon
has a weaker magnetic field than does Earth, and
why the Moon’s field was stronger in the past.

98

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Unit 3
The Future
Lunar Land Use
Life Support Systems
Lunar Biosphere

The activities in this unit spark interest in responsible land use and sustainable human
settlements on the Moon. Each activity uses and reinforces all the knowledge the students have been gaining about the Moon and Earth from Units 1 and 2. These activities
require teamwork, research, and development of model systems.
The maps produced by Clementine and Lunar Prospector will be useful for planning
other types of missions, such as automated sample returns, robotic rovers, or human
exploration. The chemical data allow sensible choices of landing sites to be made to
optimize the scientific or industrial return from future missions.
A Resource Section for Unit 3 is on Page 100.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

99

Unit 3
Resource Section
This list presents possible independent and commercial sources of items to complement the activities in Unit
3. The sources are offered without recommendation or endorsement by NASA. Inquiries should be made
directly to the appropriate source to determine availability, cost, and ordering information before sending
money. Contact your NASA Educator Resource Center (see Page 146) for more resources available directly
from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Bottle Biology, by the Bottle Biology Project,
1993, Kendall/Hunt Pub. Co.,127 p. An idea book
for exploring the world through plastic bottles and
other recyclable materials.
Dept. of Plant Pathology, College of Agricultural and
Life Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
1630 Linden Dr.
Madison, WI 53706
608-263-5645

100

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Lunar Land Use
Purpose
To design a development on the Moon that is suitable,
feasible, and beneficial.

Background [also see “Teacher's Guide” Pages 14, 15]
In this activity teams of students will present proposals for developments on the Moon in
a competition for approval from a student-staffed Lunar Council. This activity commonly runs 8 class days.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet.

In Class
Present the scenario and divide the class into cooperative teams of 4-5 students. Each
team will represent a development corporation that will make a proposal before the
Lunar Council.
You will also need 3 other students to comprise this Lunar Council.
Each student will have assigned duties, as described on the reproducible “Information
Sheets.”
Scenario: Travel to and from the Moon has become economical. As a result, the
Moon’s development has become inevitable and several corporations have
already approached the United Nations about the prospects of developing
lunar projects. In response, the U.N. has set up a Lunar Council to
consider the feasibility and suitability of each proposal.

You may want to brainstorm ideas with the class for projects on the Moon; they may
include mining communities, scientific bases, telescopic outposts, government headquarters, recreational bases, tourist sites, etc. You could assign a different idea to each team.
Distribute an “Information Sheet” to each development team. Give them 3-5 days to
decide what their developments will be and to design their maps, models, diagrams, etc.
Not only must they present their plan before the Lunar Council, but they must convince
the council of the plan's worthiness. Lobbying efforts and advertising are all part of the
game as long as they are fair.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

101

Teacher Page

Lunar Land Use
Distribute “Information Sheets” to the Lunar Council. Their task is to organize and run
a hearing regarding development on the Moon. The ultimate approval for development
is in their hands.
When most of the teams have finished, let the Lunar Council set the hearing date and let
the proceedings begin.

Wrap-up
Once a decision is rendered, distribute the “Wrap-up Questions” or discuss them as a
class.

Extensions
1. Have the students bid for project sites or use the landing sites chosen in the “Lunar
Landing Sites” activity on Page 83.
2. Hold a classroom debate on “Who owns the Moon?”
3. Have the students compare Antarctica to the Moon.

102

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Lunar Land Use
Purpose
To design a development on the Moon that is suitable,
feasible, and beneficial.

Key Words

Scenario

development

Travel to and from the Moon has become economical; as a result, the Moon’s development has become
inevitable. Several corporations have already
approached the United Nations with lunar proposals.

feasible
beneficial

In response, the U.N. has set up a Lunar Council to
look at the suitability and feasibility of each
proposal.

Materials
maps of the Moon
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
backgound information on
the Moon
“Information Sheets”
art and construction supplies

If your team is one of the development corporations,
then your job is to decide what you want to build on
the Moon and where to put it, to make the maps,
diagrams, and/or 3-dimensional models of your
project, and to convince the Lunar Council that your
project is worthy of approval.
If you are a Lunar Council member, then the
development of the Moon rests on your decisions.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

103

Lunar Land Use
Procedure
1. Read the “Information Sheet” given to your group, either a
development team or the Lunar Council, and divide the duties.
2. Each development team must execute a development plan and
design all necessary maps, diagrams, and/or 3-dimensional
models.
3. Each development team must follow the guidelines set forth by
the Lunar Council.
4. Each development team must present a plan for approval.
5. The Lunar Council reviews all the plans and decides which, if
any, will be accepted.

104

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Names:
Date:

Lunar Land Use

Team Member Information Sheet
Tasks

Your team must decide what you want to build and where you want to build it.
Everyone on your team should be assigned one or more of the following tasks:
Chief Engineer : oversees the entire project, makes critical decisions, assists in the
design of the project.
Lunar Geologist : studies the Lunar Sample Disk and researches the minerals that
may exist on the Moon for mining and/or for use as building
materials. Chooses a suitable site for the project.
Media
Consultant :

oversees development of all the visual aid materials your
team uses to present your proposal, such as maps, posters,
and models. Also coordinates the use of slides, photographs,
laser disc, etc. used to enhance your presentation.

Administrator :

keeps notes, assists media consultant, works closely with the
reporter to develop the speech to be given to the Lunar Council
and types this final written proposal.

Reporter :

works closely with all members to write the speech that will be
given before the Lunar Council. The actual presentation may be
made by any one or all team members.

Remember, you will have to “sell” your ideas before the Lunar Council. You need
a well-planned project. Focus on how your project will be used, how it will benefit
people, how it is environmentally friendly, etc.
Anything goes as long as it is actually possible. For example, if you are asked where
the money is coming from to back your project you could say you have investors who
will recover their money plus interest when the project makes money. You cannot
have stories like “a limousine drove by and out popped a suitcase full of money.”
Have fun!
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

105

Names:
Date:

Lunar Land Use

Lunar Council Information Sheetl Engineer
Tasks
You are representatives of the United Nations and have been chosen to decide how the
Moon will be developed. Your job is to organize and run a hearing where various
teams will make proposals to you concerning the development of the Moon. Your
ultimate task will be to choose one or more of the proposals brought before you. If
you wish, you can choose none of the proposals or allow certain ones with restrictions
or improvements.
Everyone on the Council should hold one of the following positions:

Chairperson :

runs the hearing by calling on the teams for their presentations,
calls on Council members and the public to ask questions, makes
critical decisions for the Council, announces the final decisions.

Timekeeper :

decides how long the presentations and the question/answer period
will last, keeps track of time during the hearing, and stops teams
that go overtime.

Administrator :

develops rating sheet with other members, keeps notes, writes, and
sends out any bulletins to the development teams.

106

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Names:
Date:

Lunar Land Use

Lunar Council Information Sheetl E
Bulletins and Ratings
Your Council should issue bulletins periodically to give guidelines and announcements
to all the development teams. An example is given below:
Lunar Council Bulletin 1-1
To: All development teams
From: Lunar Council
Regarding: Hearing timeline and financial background
We have decided to allow each team 5 minutes to make their presentations
following which the Council will have 10 minutes for questions and answers.
Finally, the public will have another 10 minutes for questions and answers.
Any variation to this policy will require permission from the Council before
the hearing.
Council members also will be asking you for your sources of money.
We want to be sure that if your proposal is chosen, you will be able to build it.

You also will need to develop a rating sheet to judge each team fairly. An example is
given below:

Group Feasibility
#
1-10

Pollution
1-10

Income
1-10

Planning
1-10

TOTAL

1
2
After all the teams have made their presentations, the Council retires and renders a
decision on which team, if any, will be allowed to develop.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

107

Names:
Date:

Lunar Land Use
Wrap-up Questions
1.

Did your team work together well? Why or why not?

2.

Do you think it is important to have hearings like this one before the Moon is
developed? Why or why not?

3.

Do you think the Lunar Council’s decision was fair? Why or why not?

4.

Should we allow developments on the Moon? Why or why not?

5.

Do you think the Moon should belong to everyone or to whomever can get there
and use it first? Why?

6.

How is the Moon and its development similar to the development of Antarctica?

7.

What kind of environmental problems do you think we need to be aware of on
the Moon?

108

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Life Support Systems
Purpose
To design and build models of life support systems for
a settlement on the Moon.

Background [also see “Teacher's Guide” Pages 14, 15]
A future lunar base will have to be a self-contained habitat with all the life support
systems necessary for the survival of people, animals, and plants. In this series of activities, the students will be designing and building models of nine life support systems
which are crucial to our successful settlement of the Moon.
The nine life support systems are:
“Air Supply,”
“Communications,”
“Electricity,”
“Food production and delivery,”
“Recreation,”
“Temperature control,”
“Transportation,”
“Waste management,” and
“Water supply.”

This activity is based on the Marsville activity on life support systems developed by the
Challenger Center and is used with permission.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheets. Separate student activity
sheets are included for each of the nine life support systems. Spaces for answers are not
provided on all sheets, so students will need extra paper.

In Class
After dividing students into teams, you may want to have each person assume a role on
the team, e.g., organizer, recorder, researcher, builder, artist, writer, etc. Distribute a
student activity sheet to each team.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

109

Teacher Page

Life Support Systems
Each team must define the requirements of their system, exploring how these requirements are currently being met on Earth. Team members will research the limitations
and/or opportunities posed by the Moon’s environment. The “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
and maps of the Moon should be used as resource materials.
Each team will decide how the system will operate and what it will contain. A key part
of the problem-solving process is the students’ ability to evaluate the system solution in
terms of whether it provides the greatest good and least harm to the persons and things
affected.
Each model of a life support system must incorporate at least four facts from the “Moon
ABCs Fact Sheet.”
Models do not have to function physically, but each team member must be able to explain
how the models should function.

Wrap-up
Have each team share what they have learned with the entire class.
1. Did the students find that the Moon's environment placed limits on their designs of
life support systems?
2. Did the students find opportunities for development on the Moon that could not
happen on Earth?
3. Summarize the aspects and conditions of the Moon which make life support such a
challenge.

110

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Air Supply
Purpose
To design and build a model air supply system for a
human settlement on the Moon.

Key Words

Procedure

atmosphere

1. The atmosphere of Earth is a combination of
several gases; review them from the “Moon
ABCs Fact Sheet.” What gas do humans and
animals need to breathe in?

photosynthesis

Materials
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
construction materials
such as cardboard boxes
and tubes, blocks, hoses,
straws, string, pins, rubber
bands, tape, etc.

2. What primary gas do humans and animals breathe
out?
3. What is photosynthesis?

4. During the process of photosynthesis, what gas
must green plants take in ?
5. What gas do the green plants produce?
6. A process called electrolysis can separate water
into hydrogen gas and oxygen gas. Another
process is being developed which can extract
oxygen from rocks and soil that contain it. Do
you think these processes could be useful on the
Moon? How?

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

111

Air Supply
7. Review the “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet.” Will the Moonbase settlers automatically be able to breathe the atmosphere or will
special provisions need to be made?
8. Design an air supply system to be used by the Moonbase inhabitants which will rely on oxygen and carbon dioxide available
only from the Moon’s resources. You may assume that ample
electricity will be available.
9. Construct a model of this system based on your design. It must
include the application of at least four facts from the “Moon
ABCs Fact Sheet.” For example, how will the Moon’s gravity
affect the design of your system? Maybe your system will be
very heavy but still portable by only a few Moonbase workers
because the Moon’s gravity is only 1/6th of Earth’s gravity.

Sketch of
my model

112

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Communications
Purpose
To design and construct a model of a communications
system to be used by people living and working on the
Moon.

Key Words

Procedure

communications

1. What different ways do we have of communicating with each other here on Earth? Do some
methods work better short distance than long
distance? What are the strong points of each of
these methods? What limitations does each have?

Materials
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
construction materials
such as cardboard boxes
and tubes, blocks,
hoses, straws, string,
pins, rubber bands, tape,
etc.

2. Why do you think communication would be important in each of the following situations:
• Between Moonbase settlers within their

constructed settlement,
• Between settlers in the settlement and those

conducting missions elsewhere on the surface
of the Moon,
• Between Moonbase and Earth (How long does

it take for a radio signal to travel the distance
between Earth and the Moon?)
3. Review the facts you have learned about the
Moon. Do you think any of the communications
methods on Earth (from Question 1) would be
impractical on the Moon? Why or why not?
Which communications methods on Earth do you
think would be particularly useful on the Moon?
What features of these methods might you have to
modify?
4. Design a communications system to be used by
the Moonbase inhabitants which will have components to satisfy the different situations listed in
Question 2. You may assume that ample
electricity will be available.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

113

Communications
5. Construct a model of this system based on your design. It must
include the application of at least four facts from the “Moon
ABCs Fact Sheet.” For example, how will the Moon’s gravity affect the design of your system? Maybe your system will be
very heavy but still portable by only a few Moonbase workers
because the Moon’s gravity is only 1/6th of Earth’s gravity.

Sketch of
my model

114

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Electricity
Purpose
To design and build a model electrical power supply
system for a human settlement on the Moon.

Key Words

Procedure

electricity

1. Think of all the things you do during a regular
school day, from the minute you wake up until the
time you go to sleep. List each activity which
requires electricity.

solar power
nuclear energy

Materials
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
construction materials
such as cardboard boxes
and tubes, blocks,
hoses, straws, string,
pins, rubber bands, tape,
etc.

2. What other activities in your town, city, or state use
electricity?
3. What is the source of the electric power for your
town or city? Is it a steam generating plant that
burns natural gas, oil, or coal? Is it a nuclear-fission
plant?
4. List other ways to produce electricity.
5. How is electricity transmitted from the generating
plant to other places?
6. Review the facts you have learned about the
Moon. Do you think the lack of atmosphere,
natural gas, oil, and coal on the Moon would
affect the production of electricity? How? Would
materials have to be shipped from Earth? Should
the lunar settlement rely on materials shipped from
Earth? Your team's job is to supply the electricity
needed by the life support systems at the
Moonbase.
7. Review the “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet.” Design
an electrical power generating plant and transmission system for the Moonbase inhabitants.
Important issues to consider include pollution,
radioactive waste storage, length of daylight on
the Moon, and power storage.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

115

Electricity
8. Construct a model of this system based on your design.
It must include the application of at least four facts from the
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet.”

Sketch of
my model

116

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Food Production
Purpose
To design and build a model of a food production and
delivery system for a human settlement on the Moon.

Key Words

Procedure

food groups

1. Review the basic food groups. What are examples
of food in each group. What basic jobs for the
body does each group perform? Make a chart on
a separate paper with your answers.

nutrition
consumption
self-sustaining

Materials
food groups chart
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
construction materials
such as cardboard boxes
and tubes, blocks,
hoses, straws, string,
pins, rubber bands, tape,
etc.

2. With your class, make a list of the foods and
liquids everyone consumed in the past 24 hours.
Organize your list in the following way: Put each
food group in a different column; then cross out
all the items you consider “junk food” and cross
out each item made from an animal which must
eat another animal to live.
3. We know that, with the exception of carnivores,
animals eat plants. But what do green plants “eat”
in addition to carbon dioxide, sunlight, and
water? Include in your answer a discussion of
the nitrogen cycle.
4. It is likely that space in the Moonbase will be limited. Protein sources like cattle and vegetable
sources like corn require substantial space for
production. Reviewing your list from Question 2,
what are other sources of protein which take less
space? What fruits and vegetables could be produced in limited space?

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

117

Food Production
5. Review the “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet” to determine what
conditions of sunlight exist. Remember that other teams are
responsible for providing you with a water supply (which will
probably have to be used cautiously or rationed,) with electricity,
with a temperature control system in the constructed Moonbase,
and with an air supply of carbon dioxide and oxygen for plants
and animals you wish to grow. Remember also that all original
stocks of plants and animals must be transported from Earth.
With these reminders, your task is to design a food production
and delivery system in the Moonbase which will:
a) supply the inhabitants with all of their nutritional needs,
b) be self-sustaining without additional stock from Earth, and
c) provide products appealing enough that the inhabitants will
enjoy eating their meals.
6. Construct a model of this system based on your design. It must
include the application of at least four facts from the “Moon
ABCs Fact Sheet.” For example, how will the Moon’s gravity
affect the design of your system? Maybe your system will be
very heavy but still portable by only a few Moonbase workers
because the Moon’s gravity is only 1/6th of Earth’s gravity.

118

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Recreation
Purpose
To design and build a model of recreational facilities
for a human settlement on the Moon.

Key Words

Procedure

entertainment

1. What value does entertainment have?

sedentary lifestyle
active lifestyle

Materials
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
construction materials
such as cardboard boxes
and tubes, blocks,
hoses, straws, string,
pins, rubber bands, tape,
etc.

2. What do you do for entertainment? Brainstorm
other forms of entertainment which people enjoy
doing.

3. Reviewing your list from Question 2, what activities require you to consider the physical environment? What features of the environment does each
activity depend upon?

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

119

Recreation
4. What value do you think entertainment would have on the
Moon? (Would the Moonbase settlers need entertainment?)

5. Review the “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet.” Which of the recreational activities on your list do you think would be possible on
the Moon? Include in your answer which activities would be
the most practical and popular.

6. Remembering that the Moon has features different from those of
Earth, what might be applied to developing new forms of
recreation?

7. Design recreational facilities for the Moonbase inhabitants which
satisfy any special recreational needs you think they will have
and include some new forms of recreation based on the “Moon
ABCs Fact Sheet.” You may assume that ample electricity will
be available.
8. Construct a model or models of the facilities based on your
design. It must include the application of at least four facts from
the “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet.” For example, how will the
Moon's gravity affect your designs?

120

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Temperature Control
Purpose
To design and build a model temperature control
system for a human settlement on the Moon.

Key Words

Procedure

Farenheit

1. Review the clothes you and your classmates wear
during each season of the year, both indoors and
outdoors. You may want to write this information
on a chalk board or paper.

Celcius

Materials
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
construction materials
such as cardboard boxes
and tubes, blocks,
hoses, straws, string,
pins, rubber bands, tape,
etc.

2. How many degrees does the temperature have to
change for you to switch from shorts to jeans,
from bare hands to gloves, or to add a shirt over a
swimming suit?
3. What effect do Sun, clouds, wind, and your own
activity level have on the temperature choices you
just made?
4. What are the coldest and hottest temperatures you
ever experienced?
5. What is the number of degrees between these two
extremes you felt?
6. Besides your selection of clothing, what other precautions did you take to protect your body?
7. Think back to a severe hot spell or cold snap your
town experienced or that you heard about. List
the effects of these temperature extremes on soil,
plants, animals, buildings, water use, and electrical
use.
8. What different environments on Earth (both indoor and outdoor) could be uncomfortable or
actually dangerous to us if we did not control the
temperature to which our bodies were exposed?

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

121

Temperature Control
9. What different ways do we have of controlling the temperature
on Earth?
10. Review the “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet.” How do tempera
tures on the Moon compare with temperatures on Earth? Will
the Moonbase inhabitants be able to exist without special temperature controls on the surface of the Moon? How about in
their constructed Moonbase settlement?
11. Design a temperature control system to protect the Moonbase
inhabitants and their possessions/equipment both on the surface
of the Moon and in their settlement. You may assume that
ample electricity will be available.
12. Construct a model of this system based on your design. It
must include the application of at least four facts from the
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet.” For example, how will the Moon’s
gravity affect the design of your system? Maybe your system
will be very heavy but still portable by only a few Moonbase
workers because the Moon’s gravity is only 1/6th of Earth’s
gravity.

122

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Transportation
Purpose
To design and build a model transportation system for
a human settlement on the Moon.

Key Words

Procedure

transportation

1. What are some different ways we transport people
and goods on Earth?

Materials
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
construction materials
such as cardboard boxes
and tubes, blocks,
hoses, straws, string,
pins, rubber bands, tape,
etc.

2. What physical features of Earth do these methods
require in order to function?
3. Write down the strong points and limitations of each
transportation system you listed in Question 1.
4. What do you think would need to be transported on
the Moon in each of the following situations:
a) within the Moonbase settlement,
b) between the settlement and other points on
the Moon.
5. Review the “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet.” Do you
think any of the transportation methods on Earth
(from Question 1) would be impractical on the
Moon? Why or why not?
6. Which transportation methods on Earth do you
think would be particularly useful on the Moon?
What features might you have to modify?
7. Design a transportation system to be used by the
Moonbase inhabitants which will have components to satisfy the different situations they could
encounter (Question 4). For this activity you may
assume that some of the basic construction materials you need will be transported from Earth to the
settlement. You may also assume that ample electricity will be available.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

123

Transportation
8. Construct a model of this system based on your design. It must
include the application of at least four facts from the “Moon
ABCs Fact Sheet.” For example, how will the Moon’s gravity
affect the design of your system? Maybe your system will be
very heavy but still portable by only a few Moonbase workers
because the Moon’s gravity is only 1/6th of Earth’s gravity.

Sketch of
my model

124

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Waste Management
Purpose
To design and build a model waste management
system for a human settlement on the Moon.

Key Words

Procedure

recycling

1. Your school, in many ways, is like a miniature
town. It has a system for governance, health care,
traffic control, a work schedule for its inhabitants,
recreation, AND waste disposal. To get a better
idea of how much waste your school generates
every week, find out how many students plus
teachers, administrators, other staff (and animals, if
any) are regularly in the buildings.

biodegradable materials
nondegradable
self-sustaining

Materials
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
construction materials
such as cardboard boxes
and tubes, blocks,
hoses, straws, string,
pins, rubber bands, tape,
etc.

2. Next, interview the cafeteria staff and the custodial
staff for the answers to these questions:
(a) What gets thrown away?
(b) How many pounds get thrown away every
week? Calculate how many pounds of trash
this is for every person in the school.
(c) Are there any items which can be recycled
before disposal? If yes, what are the recycled
items?
(d) What items are biodegradable?
(e) What is the garbage/trash packed in for
removal?
(f) Where is it taken?
(g) According to building codes, how many toilets
must there be to accommodate all the people?
3. Waste is a “hot” topic in our society. Why? Discuss what you know about the following phrases:
Excessive packaging, landfills, toxic waste, disposable plastic goods, nondegradable material,
water pollution, and air pollution.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

125

Waste Management
4. In movies like those starring “Indiana Jones,” well preserved,
ancient artifacts are often found in the desert. Scientists also
find preserved artifacts in polar ice; for example, mastodons or
ancient people. Why aren’t they decayed?
5. Review the “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet.” The Moonbase must
be an enclosed, self-sustaining settlement. Just like your school,
it must perform the basic functions of a town. Other teams are
responsible for designing and constructing several other types
of systems (air supply, communications, electricity, food production and delivery, recreation, temperature control, transportation,
and water supply). Your team’s job is to dispose of the waste
which could be generated by these systems. Design a waste
disposal system for the Moonbase. Be sure to decide what
importance, if any, will be given to biodegradable materials,
recycling, and the Moon outside of the constructed settlement.
6. Construct a model of this system based on your design. It must
include the application of at least four facts from the “Moon
ABCs Fact Sheet.” For example, how will the Moon’s gravity
affect the design of your system? Maybe your system will be
very heavy but still portable by only a few Moonbase workers
because the Moon’s gravity is only 1/6th Earth’s gravity.

126

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Water Supply
Purpose
To design and build a model water supply system for
a human settlement on the Moon.

Key Words

Procedure

water conservation

1 Think of all the things you do during a regular
school day, from the minute you wake up until the
time you go to sleep. List each activity which
involves water.

drought

Materials
“Moon ABCs Fact Sheet”
construction materials
such as cardboard boxes
and tubes, blocks,
hoses, straws, string,
pins, rubber bands, tape,
etc.

2. Are there any water activities you could eliminate
for a day? a week? longer?
3. What other activities in your town use water?
Could any of those activities be eliminated?
4. During a dry summer, have you ever heard a
public announcement that “water conservation
measures are in effect”? What activities are affected by this announcement?
5. Imagine if summer drought continued for years,
then how could water be conserved for people?
for animals? for crops? for businesses?
6. Review the “Moon ABCs Fact Sheet.” Where
is the water on the Moon and in what form or
forms does it exist?
7. Design a water supply system to be used by the
Moonbase inhabitants which will rely only on
water available from the Moon’s resources.
You may assume that ample electricity will be
available.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

127

Water Supply
8. Construct a model of this sytem based on your design. It must
include the application of at least four facts from the “Moon
ABCs Fact Sheet.” For example, how will the Moon's gravity
affect the design of your system? Maybe your system will be
very heavy but still portable by only a few Moonbase workers
because the Moon's gravity is only 1/6th of Earth's gravity.

Sketch of
my model

128

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Lunar Biosphere
Purpose
To build a biosphere that is a balanced, self-enclosed
living system able to run efficiently over a long period
of time.

Background [also see “Teacher's Guide” Pages 14, 15]
Earth is the ultimate biosphere, literally a “life ball.” It holds and sustains all life
known to humanity. As men and women look to traveling and living beyond our blue
planet, we see conditions that are too harsh to sustain life as we know it.
Conditions on the Moon are not favorable for sustaining life because of the absence of
water, organic topsoil, and atmosphere. Also lunar days (equal to 14 Earth days)
and nights are very long. Water must be brought from Earth or made using oxygen
from lunar regolith and hydrogen from Earth. Nutrients need to be added to lunar
regolith and plants have to be grown in a self-enclosed system. What's more, artificial
light must be used during the long, dark periods.
This activity challenges students to create a working model of a lunar biosphere that is a
balanced, self-enclosed living system able to run efficiently over a long period of time.

Preparation
Review and prepare materials listed on the student sheet. Here are some suggestions.
Seedlings: About two weeks prior to this activity, sprout the seedlings for use in the
biospheres. Successful biospheres have been made using mung, radish, and peanut.
Tomato seedlings can also be used, as well as ferns, vines, and simple garden weeds.
Soil materials: Collect bins or bags to hold the variety of soil materials: vermiculite,
permiculite, cinder, gravel, sand, silt, clay, and fertilizer.
Animals: Students should collect live critters to live in the biospheres. These can
include -- insects (ants, cockroaches, beetles, etc.), mollusks (snails, slugs, etc.), arachnids (spiders, etc.), and crustaceans (sow bugs).
Plastic bottles for biospheres: Use 2-liter soda bottles with the black base. Remove the
black base by submerging it in a large pot of hot (but not boiling) water. This softens the
glue holding the base onto the bottle without melting the plastic. Take off the label. With
an exacto knife or razor, cut off the top spout of the bottle. For safety, it is best not to
allow students to do the cutting. You may place the spout with your other plastic
recyclables as it will not be used in this activity. Prepare one container per student.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

129

Teacher Page

Lunar Biosphere
The students will plug the holes in the black base with wax, tape, or clay. The base
must be watertight. They will then fill the base with a predetermined soil mixture.
They will add water, seedlings, and animals as decided by the team. Finally, they will
invert the plastic container into the base, seal it with clear, plastic tape, and label it. The
label should include the student's name, names of team members, date, and time the
biosphere was sealed.

In Class
After discussing the background information and purpose of this activity, divide the
class into cooperative teams of 4 students each.

Biosphere mobiles
Have each team create a hanging mobile with the theme “Biosphere.” Each hanging
component represents one part of the living Earth system, e.g., water, plants, animals,
people, air, Sun, soil, etc.
After mobiles have been balanced and hung from the ceiling, have the students predict
what would happen if one part were removed or just shifted. Ask the students to shift
or remove one part. Does the biosphere remain balanced? Ask the students to try to
rebalance and hang their mobiles. Have them relate what they see to what might happen if a part of any biosphere is changed or removed.

Materials
cardboard or heavy-weight paper
markers or crayons
string
something to use as the frame -- wooden chopsticks, other kinds of sticks,
plastic drinking straws, hangers, etc.

130

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Teacher Page

Lunar Biosphere
Making Biospheres
After discussing the importance of a balanced biosphere, you may choose to have the
students number themselves from 1 to 4 for a role assignment within each team:
1 = Botanist - person who studies plants,
2 = Agronomist - person who studies soils and crops,
3 = Science Specialist - person who relates conditions of soil and water
to optimal plant growth,
4 = Zoologist - person who studies animals.
Distribute the “Team Member Information Sheets.” Students are responsible for reading
and sharing the data contained on their own sheets. Have them log their shared information on their worksheet -- as outlined in Question 3 on page 133.
Before the actual construction, each team must decide the following for
their lunar biospheres:
1. best lunar soil mixture
for example, vermiculite, permiculite, cinder, sand, gravel, fertilizer, etc.
2. amounts of each type of soil material
for example:
10 Tablespoons of sand
10 Tablespoons of silt
10 teaspoons of vermiculite
1/2 teaspoon of fertilizer
3. optimal lighting
for example: direct sunlight, shade, artificial lamp, etc.
4. optimal amount of water to add to the biosphere before sealing it
for example: 5 Tablespoons of water
5. kinds and amounts of seedlings and animals to include inside
for example: mung, radish, peanut seedlings -- use just one type or a combination. If these are not available, then other seedlings can easily be used. Other examples include ferns, vines, and garden weeds. Have students explain why they
made their choices. Students can also do preliminary research on their organisms.
Note: Each lunar biosphere must include plants and animals.
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

131

Teacher Page

Lunar Biosphere
After teams have discussed and decided these five points, then each student will make
his/her own biosphere.
The biospheres must be completely sealed with clear, plastic tape.
No air or other materials can go in or out.
Once the biosphere is sealed, it cannot be opened again.
Each lunar biosphere should be labeled with the student's name, names of team members, date, and time it was sealed. Put this label on the black base.
After the biospheres are built, they should be set under the lighting conditions chosen by
the teams.
A “Data Sheet” and an “Observation Sheet” are provided for student use.

Wrap-up
Are some lunar biospheres doing better than others?
What are some of the factors leading to the success or failure of the biospheres?
Based on this experience of making a model lunar biosphere, what is your opinion on
the potential success of actual self-contained habitats on the Moon?

132

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Lunar Biosphere
Purpose
To build a biosphere that is a balanced, self-enclosed
living system able to run efficiently over a long period
of time.

Key Words

Procedure for Teams

biosphere

1. Discuss and list the questions you may want to ask
before you start to build a lunar biosphere.

soil
atmosphere
organism
photosynthesis
agronomist
botanist
zoologist

Materials
“Data and Observation
Sheets”

2. How and where could you find possible solutions
to these questions?

“Team Member Information
Sheets”
measuring cups & spoons
plastic 2-liter bottle, cut
vermiculite
permiculite
cinder, gravel, sand
silt, clay
fertilizer
seedlings and animals
water

3. List all important information you obtained from
the botanist, agronomist, science specialist, and zoologist that will assist you in planning the most efficient and effective lunar biosphere possible.

clear, plastic tape
lamp
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

133

Lunar Biosphere
Procedure for Each Person
4. Fill out the “Biosphere Data Sheet” with your team's
choices of best soil mixture, types and numbers of seedlings and other organisms, optimal lighting conditions, and the optimal amount of water to add to the
biosphere before sealing it. Remember that you are striving to
create a living system that will remain balanced over a long
period of time.
5. Obtain a pre-cut plastic bottle from your teacher and build
your personal biosphere following the team’s recommendations.
6. Seal your biosphere with clear, plastic tape. We are simulating a lunar biosphere, therefore no air or other materials can go
in or out. After your biosphere is sealed, it cannot be reopened.
7. Label the biosphere with your name, names of your team members, date, and time it was sealed. Put the label on the black
base.
8. Set your biosphere under the lighting conditions chosen by the
team.
9. Fill in the “Biosphere Observation Sheet” as directed by
your teacher.

134

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Team Members:

Name:
Date:

Lunar Biosphere - Data Sheet on Materials Used
Soil Material

Seedlings / Animal organisms

Amount Used

Amount Used

Lighting Conditions:

Amount of water added to Biosphere before it was sealed:

Date and Time it was sealed:
Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

135

Team Members:

Name:
Date:

Lunar Biosphere - Observation Sheet
Date

Lighting
Conditions

136

Height of Seedlings (cm)
Mung

Radish

Peanut

Observations

Color
Sketches

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Name:

Team Members:

Date:

Lunar Biosphere

Team Member Information Sheet
for Botanist

Mung bean, Phaseolus aureus
origin: India, central Asia

The mung bean, a bushy annual which grows 76 - 90 meters tall, has many branches
with hairy bean-like leaves. Flowers are yellowish-green with purple streaks and produce long, thin, hairy pods containing 9 - 15 small yellow seeds. Seeds are used to
produce bean sprouts.

Radish, Raphanus sativus
origin: temperate Asia

The radish produces white, red, or black roots and stems under a rosette of lobed
leaves. It is an annual or biennial plant, which grows several inches high. Radishes
should be planted 1 cm deep, and will sprout in 3 - 7 days. When planted together with
other root crops, radishes can be used to decoy pests, and the spaces left in the soil
when they are pulled out provide growing room for the other root crops, which grow
more slowly.

Peanut, Arachis hypogaea
origin: South America

The peanut, an annual vegetable which belongs to the pea family, grows from
15 - 76 cm tall. Flowers are small yellow clusters that grow on stems called pegs.
Pegs grow downward and push into the soil. Nuts develop from these pegs
2.54 - 7.6 cm underground.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

137

Team Members:

Name:
Date:

Lunar Biosphere

Team Member Information Sheetl Engineer
for Agronomist
Soil has four functions:
1)
2)
3)
4)

supply water to plants,
supply nutrients (lunar regolith, however, needs to have nutrients added to it),
supply gases (oxygen and carbon dioxide), and
support plants.

The ideal soil holds moisture and nutrients while letting excess water drain to make
room for air.

Types of soil:
clay
sand
silt
loam

138

- small particles, less than 1/256 mm, which pack closely. Poor drainage.
- irregular particles between 1/16 mm and 2 mm. Holds very little water.
- between clay and sand-size particles. Not very fertile, packs hard.
- a mixture of clay, silt, and sand. The best kind of soil.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Team Members:

Name:
Date:

Lunar Biosphere

Team Member Information Sheetl E
for Science Specialist

Growing Conditions
Mung bean - grows best in full sun, in a rich, well-drained soil. It shouldn’t be
allowed to dry out completely.
Radish

- is a cool season crop, and can take temperatures below freezing. It can
tolerate partial shade. Soil should be well-drained. If water supply
gets low, then radishes become woody.

Peanut

- needs lots of Sun and warmth. It is relatively tolerant of dry soil.
These seeds are very sensitive to fertilizer.

Soil

- can be improved by the addition of fertilizers, which provide nutrients
to the plant. This makes the plant healthier, and better able to resist
disease and pest attacks.
Vermiculite and perlite are “puffed up” minerals that are used to lighten
heavy clay soils with air spaces, or to help sandy soils hold more water. They do not directly provide nutrition to the plants.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

139

Team Members:

Name:
Date:

Lunar Biosphere

Team Member Information Sheetl
for Zoologist
Mung bean - has no serious pest or disease problems.
Radish

- has no serious disease problems. Maggots and aphids may be a pest
problem, but radishes are usually harvested quickly enough so these
do not have much effect.

Peanut

- may be attacked by nematodes, aphids, and in some areas, by rodents.

140

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Glossary
Words that appear in italic type within a definition also are defined in the Glossary.
A'a: Blocky, angular, and rough type of lava flow.
Agglutinates: Common particle type in lunar
sediment; agglutinates consist of small rock,
mineral, and glass fragments bonded together
with glass.
Agronomist: Scientist who studies soil management and the production of field crops.
Anomaly: A deviation from the common rule,
type, or form; something abnormal or inconsistent.
Anorthosite: An igneous rock made up almost
entirely of plagioclase feldspar.
Antenna: A conductor by which electromagnetic
waves are transmitted or received.
Apollo: U.S. Space Program which included 6
piloted lunar landings between 1969 and 1972.
Apollo astronauts collected and returned 382
kilograms of rock and sediment samples from
the Moon.
Astronaut: Person engaged in or trained for
spaceflight.
Atmosphere: Mixture of gases that surround a
planet.
Basalt: Fine-grained, dark-colored igneous rock
compsed primarily of plagioclase feldspar and
pyroxene; other minerals such as olivine and
ilmenite are usually present.
Beneficial: Advantageous, helpful.
Biodegradable (see Nondegradable): Capable of
decaying and being absorbed by the environment.
Biosphere: The part of Earth's crust, water, and
atmosphere where living organisms can survive.
Botanist: Scientist who studies plant life.
Breccia: Rock consisting of angular, coarse fragments embedded in a fine-grained matrix.
Celsius: A temperature scale that assigns the
value 0o C to the freezing point of water and the
value of 100o C to the boiling point of water at
standard pressure.
Channel: A furrow or narrow passageway in the
ground.

Clementine: A global mapping mission to the
Moon launched in 1994 by the U. S. Department of Defense, with science support from
NASA.
Communicatons: A means of transmitting and
receiving information.
Console: A desklike structure that is the control
unit of an electrical or electronic system.
Consumption: The act of eating or drinking;
using energy and materials.
Core: The central region of a planet or moon
frequently made of different materials than the
surrounding regions (mantle and crust). Earth
and the Moon are thought to have cores of iron
and nickel.
Crater (see Impact): A hole or depression. Most
are roughly circular or oval in outline. On
Earth most natural craters are of volcanic
origin. On the Moon most are of impact origin.
Crater chain: Several craters along a general
line.
Crust: The outermost layer of a planet or moon,
above the mantle.
Dark mantle deposits: Deposits of dark glass on
the Moon, possibly products of volcanic fire
fountaining.
Density: Mass per volume; how much material in
a given space.
Descartes: Lunar highlands site of Apollo 16
landing on April 21, 1972.
Development: The act of bringing into being or
advancing to a more effective state.
Differentiation: Chemical zonation caused by
differences in the densities of minerals; heavy
materials sink, less dense materials float.
Drought: Extended period of dry weather, especially one causing damage to crops.
Earthquake: Sudden motion or trembling of
Earth caused by the abrupt release of slowly
accumulated elastic energy in rocks.
Ejecta: Material thrown out from and deposited
around an impact crater.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

141

Glossary
Electricity: Energy caused by the motion of
electrons, protons, and other charged particles.
Entertainment: Amusement, or diversion; something to hold attention for pleasure.
Erosion: Removal of weathered rocks by moving
water, wind, ice, or gravity.
Eruption (see Source): A break out or brust of
volcanic matter.
Farenheit: A temperature scale with the freezing
point of water assigned the value 32o F and the
boiling point of water 212o F.
Farside: The side of the Moon that never faces
Earth.
Feasible: Capable of being done or accomplished;
probable, likely.
Fissure: Crack extending far into a planet or
moon through which magma travels to and
erupts onto the surface.
Food groups: Categories into which all foods are
divided; meats and protein, fruits, vegetables,
dairy, carbohydrates, and sugars.
Fra Mauro: Landing site of Apollo 14 on the
Moon on February 5, 1971.
Geologist: Scientist who studies Earth, its materials, the physical and chemical changes that
occur on the surface and in the interior, and the
history of the planet and its life forms. Planetary geologists extend their studies to the
Moon, planets, and other solid bodies in the
Solar System.
Giant impact theory: An explanation for the
origin of the Moon from Earth debris which
collected in space after a projectile the size of
planet Mars smashed into a growing Earth.
Hadley-Appenine: Landing site of Apollo 15 on
the Moon on July 31, 1971.
Highland "soil": Sediment on the surface of the
lunar highlands; composed of broken rock and
mineral fragments, and glass produced by impact.
Highlands: Oldest exposed areas on the surface
of the Moon; extensively cratered, and chemically distinct from the maria.
Igneous: Rocks or processes involving the formation and solidification of hot, molten magma.

142

Ilmenite: Opaque mineral found in basalt; nearly
pure iron-titanium oxide (FeTiO3.)
Impact (see Crater): The forceful striking of one
body, such as a meteorite, against another body
such as a moon or planet.
Impactor (see Projectile, Meteorite): Object that
impacts a surface.
KREEP: On the Moon, type of highlands rock
rich in potassium (K), rare-earth elements
(REE), and phosphorus (P).
Latitude: The angular distance North or South
from the Earth's equator measured in degrees
on the meridian of a point; Equator being 0o and
the poles 90oN and 90oS.
Lava: fluid magma that flows onto the surface of
a planet or moon; erupted from a volcano or
fissure. Also, the rock formed by solidification
of this material.
Levee: Zones in a lava flow where the lava
between the zones is moving faster than the
lava outside the zones.
Lifestyle (see Sedentary): A person's general
pattern of living.
Longitude: The angular distance East or West,
between the meridian of a particular place on
Earth and that of Greenwich, England, expressed in degrees or time.
Lunar: Of or pertaining to the Moon.
Lunar Prospector: U. S. Discovery-class mission to the Moon scheduled for launch in early
1998. Its instruments are designed to provide
global maps and data sets of the Moon's composition and magnetic and gravity fields from
a low polar orbit.
Magma: Term applied to molten rock in the
interior of a planet or moon. When it reaches
the surface, magma is called lava.
Magma Ocean: Term used to describe the layer
of magma, hundreds of kilometers thick;
thought to have covered the Moon 4.5 billion
years ago.
Magnetic field: The region of "altered space" that
will interact with the magnetic properties of a
magnet. It is located mainly between the
opposite poles of a magnet or in the energetic

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Glossary
space about an electric charge in motion.
Mantle: A mostly solid layer of Earth lying
beneath the crust and above the core; consisting mostly of iron, magnesium, silicon, and
oxygen.
Mare basalt: Rocks making up the dark, smooth,
mare areas of the Moon
Mare "soil": Sediment on the surface of the lunar
maria; fragments of basalt rocks, broken mineral grains, and glass produced by impact.
Maria (mare): Dark areas on the Moon covered
by basalt lava flows.
Metamorphic: Rocks that have recrystallized in
a solid state as a result of changes in temperature, pressure, and chemical environment.
Meteorite (see Impactor, Projectile): A metallic
or stony (silicate) body that has fallen on Earth
or the Moon from outer space.
Meteoritic bombardment: Intensive and prolonged impacts of a surface by meteorites or
other impactors.
Mineral: Naturally occurring inorganic solid
with a definite chemical composition and crystal
structure.
Moonquake (see Earthquake): Sudden motion or
trembling of the Moon caused by the abrupt
release of slowly accumulated elastic energy in
rocks.
Mountain: A natural elevation of a planetary
surface.
NASA: United States federal agency; National
Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Nearside: The side of the Moon that always faces
Earth.
Nondegradable (see Biodegradable): Something
that can not be chemically decomposed.
Norite: Igneous rock found in the lunar highlands
composed of plagioclase and pyroxene.
Nuclear energy: Process by which the fission of
235
U releases heat to make steam, which then
drives turbines to create electricity.
Nutrition: Process by which animals and plants
take in and utilize food material.
Ocean of Storms: Landing site of Apollo 12 on
the Moon on Nov. 19, 1969; Oceanus

Procellarum.
Olivine: Mineral found in basalt; ranges from
Mg2SiO4 to Fe2SiO4.
Orange "soil": On the Moon, a mixture of very
small dark orange and black glass balls which
formed from quickly cooled lava droplets during a pyroclastic eruption.
Organism: Any form of animal or plant life.
Pahoehoe: Basaltic lava with a smooth, billowy,
or ropy surface.
Photosynthesis: The process by which plants
convert water and carbon dioxide into carbohydrates, using sunlight as the source of energy
and the aid of chlorophyll.
Plagioclase feldspar: Common mineral; ranges
from NaAlSi3O8 to CaAl2Si2O8.
Plate tectonics: Theory formulated in the late
1960s that states the Earth's crust and upper
mantle
(a layer called the lithosphere) is
broken into moving pieces called plates. The
formation of mountains and volcanoes, and the
occurrence of earthquakes have been explained
using this theory.
Pressure ridges: Long, narrow wavelike folds in
the surface of lava flows; formed where lava
may have buckled up against slower moving or
stationary lava downstream.
Projectile (see Impactor, Meteorite): Object that
impacts a surface.
Pyroclastic eruption: Explosive eruption of lava
producing and ejecting hot fragments of rock
and lava.
Ray: Streak of material blasted out and away
from an impact crater.
Recycling: To treat or process waste materials
making them suitable for reuse.
Regolith (see Sediment, Soil): Loose, unconsolidated rock, mineral, and glass fragments. On
the Moon, this debris is produced by impacts
and blankets the surface.
Rille: Long channel on the Moon crossing the
surface of maria; probably formed either as an
open channel in a lava flow, or as an underground tube carrying hot lava which collapsed
as the lava flowed out.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

143

Glossary
Robot: A machine that does mechanical tasks on
command and operates automatically.
Rock: A naturally formed solid that is an aggregate of one or more minerals.
Scale: The relationship of a distance on a map
or model to the true distance in space; written
as a ratio, such as 1:24,000.
Sea of Serenity: One of the maria on the Moon's
nearside; Mare Serenitatis.
Sea of Tranquillity: Landing site of Apollo 11 on
the Moon on July 20, 1969; Mare Tranquillitatis.
Sedentary (see Lifestyle): characterized by much
sitting and little physical activity.
Sediment (see Regolith): Soild rock or mineral
fragments transported and deposited by wind,
water, gravity, or ice; preciptitated by chemical
reactions; or secreted by organisms;
accummulated as layers in loose, unconsolidated form.
Sedimentary: Rock formed when sediment is
compacted and lithified.
Self-sustaining: Able to exist and function without outside help.
SNC meteorites (see Meteorite): Group of meteorites with relatively young ages (slightly over
1 billion years old) that probably came from
Mars.
Soil (see Regolith, Sediment): The upper layers of
sediment on Earth that support plant growth.
Solar power: Energy derived from the Sun or
sunlight for use as a source of electricity.
Solar system: TheSun and all the objects (planets, moons, asteroids, and comets) that orbit
the Sun.
Solar wind: The stream of charged particles
(mainly ionized hydrogen) moving outward
from the Sun with velocities in the range 300500 kilometers per second.
Source (see Eruption): Location where igneous
matter (lava and gases) erupts onto the surface;
vent, fissure, volcano, etc.
Spacecraft: Vehicle capable of traveling in outer
space.
Stratigraphy: Study of layered rock to under-

144

stand the sequence of geological events.
Taurus-Littrow: Landing site of Apollo 17 on the
Moon on Dec. 11, 1972.
Terrain: Area of the surface with a distinctive
geological character.
Tool carrier: Storage container for tools on the
Apollo Lunar Roving Vehicle.
Transportation: The means of carrying something from one place to another.
Troctolite: Igneous rock found in the lunar highlands composed of plagioclase and olivine.
Vesicle: Bubble-shaped cavity in a volcanic rock
formed by expanding gases.
Volatiles: Chemical elements that enter a vapor
phase at relatively low temperatures.
Volcano: Mountain formed from the eruption of
igneous matter through a source vent.
Water conservation: The wise use of water as a
natural resource; the prevention of loss or
waste of water.
Weathering: The mechanical breakdown and
chemical alteration of rocks and minerals at
Earth's surface during exposure to air,
moisture, and organic matter.
Zoologist: Scientist who studies animals.

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities, NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

World Wide Web Resources for Educators
for the Moon
Lunar Exploration

Lunar Prospector Mission

http://cass.jsc.nasa.gov/moon.html
Lunar & Planetary Institute (Exploring the Moon)

http://lunar.arc.nasa.gov/
Homepage from NASA Ames Research Center

http://www-sn.jsc.nasa.gov/explore/explore.htm
Johnson Space Center (future human exploration)

http://juggler.lmsc.lockheed.com/lunar/
Lunar Prospector homepage from Lockheed-Martin

http://ilewg.jsc.nasa.gov/
International Lunar Exploration Working Group

http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/
lunarprosp.html
National Space Science Data Center

http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/planets/
moonpage.html
National Space Science Data Center (Moon
homepage)
http://spacelink.nasa.gov/Instructional.Materials/
Curriculum.Materials/Sciences/Astronomy/
Our.Solar.System/Earth's.Moon/
Exploring.The.Moon. Teacher.Guide.4-12/
.index.html
Exploring the Moon on-line version of this publication
at NASA Spacelink

Planetary Exploration
http://www.soest.hawaii.edu/PSRdiscoveries/
Planetary Science Research Discoveries web
magazine
http://www.soest.hawaii.edu/spacegrant/
class_acts/
Hands-on classroom activities for planetary science
http://spacelink.nasa.gov/
NASA Spacelink

Apollo Mission
http://www-sn.jsc.nasa.gov/explore/Data/Apollo/
Apollo.htm
Apollo Experiment Operations
http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/alsj/
Apollo Lunar Surface Journal

http://bang.lanl.gov/solarsys/
Views Of The Solar System (Calvin Hamilton/LANL)
http://seds.lpl.arizona.edu/nineplanets/
nineplanets/nineplanets/luna.html
The Nine Planets - Moon pages (Bill Arnett/SEDS)
http://pds.jpl.nasa.gov/planets/
Welcome to the Planets (PDS/JPL)

Clementine Mission
http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/
clementine.html
Lunar data from the Clementine Mission
http://cass.jsc.nasa.gov/publications/slidesets/
clementine.html
Clementine Explores the Moon, annotated slide set
http://cass.jsc.nasa.gov/research/clemen/
clemen.html
Clementine Mission - Images of the Moon

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's Guide with Activities

http://stardate.utexas.edu/resources/ssguide/
SSG_Contents.html
Guide to the Solar System (McDonald Observatory)
http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/imgcat/
NSSDC Planetary Image Catalog
http://photojournal.jpl.nasa.gov/
NASA Planetary Photojournal
http://nix.nasa.gov/
NASA Image eXchange (NIX)

NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

145

NASA Resources for Educators
NASA’s Central Operation of Resources for Educators (CORE) was established for the national and international distribution of NASA-produced educational materials in
audiovisual format. Educators can obtain a catalogue and an
order form by one of the following methods:
• NASA CORE
Lorain County Joint Vocational School
15181 Route 58 South
Oberlin, OH 44074
• Phone (440) 774-1051, Ext. 249 or 293
• Fax (440) 774-2144
• E-mail nasaco@leeca.esu.k12.oh.us
• Home Page: http://spacelink.nasa.gov/CORE

Educator Resource Center Network
To make additional information available to the education
community, the NASA Education Division has created the
NASA Educator Resource Center (ERC) network. ERCs contain a wealth of information for educators: publications, reference books, slide sets, audio cassettes, videotapes, telelecture
programs, computer programs, lesson plans, and teacher
guides with activities. Educators may preview, copy, or receive
NASA materials at these sites. Because each NASA Field
Center has its own areas of expertise, no two ERCs are exactly
alike. Phone calls are welcome if you are unable to visit the ERC
that serves your geographic area. A list of the centers and the
regions they serve includes:
AK, AZ, CA, HI, ID, MT, NV, OR,
UT, WA, WY
NASA Educator Resource Center
Mail Stop 253-2
NASA Ames Research Center
Moffett Field, CA 94035-1000
Phone: (650) 604-3574

AL, AR, IA, LA, MO,TN
U.S. Space and Rocket Center
NASA Educator Resource Center for
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center
P.O. Box 070015
Huntsville, AL 35807-7015
Phone: (205) 544-5812

CT, DE, DC, ME, MD, MA, NH,
NJ, NY, PA, RI, VT
NASA Educator Resource Laboratory
Mail Code 130.3
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, MD 20771-0001
Phone: (301) 286-8570

MS
NASA Educator Resource Center
Building 1200
NASA John C. Stennis Space Center
Stennis Space Center, MS 39529-6000
Phone: (228) 688-3338

CO, KS, NE, NM, ND, OK, SD, TX
JSC Educator Resource Center
Space Center Houston
NASA Johnson Space Center
1601 NASA Road One
Houston, TX 77058-3696
Phone: (281) 483-8696
FL, GA, PR, VI
NASA Educator Resource Laboratory
Mail Code ERL
NASA Kennedy Space Center
Kennedy Space Center, FL 32899-0001
Phone: (407) 867-4090
KY, NC, SC, VA, WV
Virginia Air and Space Museum
NASA Educator Resource Center for
NASA Langley Research Center
600 Settler's Landing Road
Hampton, VA 23669-4033
Phone: (757) 727-0900 x 757

NASA Educator Resource Center
JPL Educational Outreach
Mail Stop CS-530
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory
4800 Oak Grove Drive
Pasadena, CA 91109-8099
Phone: (818) 354-6916
CA cities near the center
NASA Educator Resource Center for
NASA Dryden Flight Research Center
45108 N. 3rd Street East
Lancaster, CA 93535
Phone: (805) 948-7347
VA and MD's Eastern Shores
NASA Educator Resource Lab
Education Complex - Visitor Center
Building J-1
NASA Wallops Flight Facility
Wallops Island, VA 23337-5099
Phone: (757) 824-2297/2298

IL, IN, MI, MN, OH, WI
NASA Educator Resource Center
Mail Stop 8-1
NASA Lewis Research Center
21000 Brookpark Road
Cleveland, OH 44135-3191
Phone: (216) 433-2017

146

Exploring the Moon -- A Teacher's

Regional Educator Resource Centers (RERCs) offer
more educators access to NASA educational materials. NASA
has formed partnerships with universities, museums, and other
educational institutions to serve as RERCs in many states. A
complete list of RERCs is available through CORE, or electronically via NASA Spacelink at http://spacelink.nasa.gov
NASA On-line Resources for Educators provide current
educational information and instructional resource materials to
teachers, faculty, and students. A wide range of information is
available, including science, mathematics, engineering, and
technology education lesson plans, historical information related to the aeronautics and space program, current status
reports on NASA projects, news releases, information on NASA
educational programs, useful software and graphics files. Educators and students can also use NASA resources as learning
tools to explore the Internet, accessing information about educational grants, interacting with other schools which are already
on-line, and participating in on-line interactive projects, communicating with NASA scientists, engineers, and other team members to experience the excitement of real NASA projects.
Access these resources through the NASA Education Home
Page: http://www.hq.nasa.gov/education

NASA Television (NTV) is the Agency's distribution system for
live and taped programs. It offers the public a front-row seat for
launches and missions, as well as informational and educational
programming, historical documentaries, and updates on the latest
developments in aeronautics and space science. NTV is transmitted
on the GE-2 satellite, Transponder 9C at 85 degrees West
longitude, vertical polarization, with a frequency of 3880 megahertz,
and audio of 6.8 megahertz.
Apart from live mission coverage, regular NASA Television
programming includes a Video File from noon to 1:00 pm, a NASA
Gallery File from 1:00 to 2:00 pm, and an Education File from 2:00
to 3:00 pm (all times Eastern). This sequence is repeated at
3:00 pm, 6:00 pm, and 9:00 pm, Monday through Friday. The NTV
Education File features programming for teachers and students on
science, mathematics, and technology. NASA Television
programming may be videotaped for later use.
For more information on NASA Television, contact:
NASA Headquarters, Code P-2, NASA TV, Washington, DC
20546-0001 Phone: (202) 358-3572
NTV Home Page: http://www.hq.nasa.gov/ntv.html
How to Access NASA's Education Materials and Services,
EP-1996-11-345-HQ This brochure serves as a guide to accessing a variety of NASA materials and services for educators.
Copies are available through the ERC network, or electronically
via NASA Spacelink. NASA Spacelink can be accessed at the
following address: http://spacelink.nasa.gov

Guide with Activities

NASA EG-1997-10-116-HQ

Exploring the Moon—A Teacher's Guide with
Activities for Earth and Space Sciences

EDUCATOR REPLY CARD
To achieve America’s goals in Educational Excellence, it is NASA’s mission to develop
supplementary instructional materials and curricula in science, mathematics, geography, and technology. NASA seeks to involve the educational community in the
development and improvement of these materials. Your evaluation and suggestions are
vital to continually improving NASA educational materials.
Please take a moment to respond to the statements and questions below.
You can submit your response through the Internet or by mail. Send your
reply to the following Internet address:

5. What kind of recommendation would you make to someone who asks about this
educator guide?

❏ Excellent

❏ Good

❏ Average

❏ Poor

❏ Very Poor

6. How did you use this educator guide?

❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏

Background Information

❏

Other: Please specify: _________________________________________

Demonstrate NASA Materials
Group Discussions
Integration Into Existing Curricula
Lecture
Team Activities

❏
❏
❏
❏
❏

Critical Thinking Tasks
Demonstration
Hands-On Activities
Interdisciplinary Activity
Science and Mathematics
Standards Integration

http://ednet.gsfc.nasa.gov/edcats/teachers_guide
7. Where did you learn about this educator guide?
You will then be asked to enter your data at the appropriate prompt.
Otherwise, please return the reply card by mail. Thank you.
1. With what grades did you use the educator guide?
Number of Teachers/Faculty:
K-4

5-8

College/University -

9-12
Undergraduate

Community College
Graduate

NASA Educator Resource Center
NASA Central Operation of Resources for Educators (CORE)
Institution/School System
Fellow Educator
Workshop/Conference
Other: Please specify: _________________________________________

8. What features of this educator guide did you find particularly

Number of Students:
K-4

❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏

5-8

College/University -

9-12

Community College

Undergraduate

Graduate

helpful?
____________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________

Number of Others:
Administrators/Staff

Parents

Professional Groups

General Public

Civic Groups

Other

2. What is your home 5- or 9-digit zip code? __ __ __ __ __ — __ __ __ __

9. How can we make this educator guide more effective for you?
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
10.Additional comments:

3. This is a valuable educator guide?

❏ Strongly Agree ❏ Agree ❏ Neutral

❏ Disagree ❏ Strongly Disagree

______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________

4. I expect to apply what I learned in this educator guide.

❏ Strongly Agree ❏ Agree ❏ Neutral

❏ Disagree ❏ Strongly Disagree

Today’s Date:

EG-1997-10-116-HQ

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
EDUCATION DIVISION
MAIL CODE FE
WASHINGTON DC 20546–0001

!2054600012!
Fold along line and tape closed.

Please Place
Stamp Here
Post Office
Will Not Deliver
Without Proper
Postage

